ic 1-5 . 
“>, ‘ . } = Bd 4 ’ 2 1 f 
, LS ; | 
: a i o = ; = | ¥ 7 & 5 


fi % 
» i*% 
ts 
ee 


% 
Ms i | 


(}ORRUPTIONS 


‘awh 


SCRIPTURE. 


UNIVERSIT 


Rie ot > estar 
ais 


Se! 


AN 


HISTORICAL ACCOUNT 


OF 


TWO NOTABLE 


CORRUPTIONS OF SCRIPTURE: 
IN A LETTER TO A FRIEND. 


BY 


STR ISAAC NEWTON. 


PUBLISHED ENTIRE FROM A MS. IN THE AUTHOR’S HAND-WRITING 
IN THE POSSESSION OF THE REV. DR. EKENS, 
DEAN OF CARLISLE. 


Exactly reprinted from Bishop Horsley’s Edition of Sir Isaac Newton’s 
Works, vol. v. 1785. 


LONDON: 
JOHN GREEN, 121 NEWGATE STREET. 
1841. 


Digitized by Google 


BISHOP HORSLEY’S 
ADVERTISEMENT. 


A vERy imperfect copy of this Tract, want- 
ing both the beginning and the end, and 
erroneous in many places, was published at 
London in the year 1754, under the title of 
Two Letters from Sir Isaac Newton to Mr. 
Le Clerc. But in the Author’s MS. the 
whole is one continued discourse ; which, al- 
though it is conceived in the epistolary form, 
1s not addressed to any particular person. 


AN 
HISTORICAL ACCOUNT 


OF 


TWO NOTABLE CORRUPTIONS 
OF SCRIPTURE. 


IN A LETTER TO A FRIEND. 


BY SIR ISAAC NEWTON. 


SiR, 


SINCE the discourses of some late writers have 
raised in you a curiosity of knowing the truth of 
that text of Scripture concerning the testimony 
of the Three in Heaven, 1 John v. 7, I have here 
sent you an account of what the reading has been 
in all ages, and by what steps it has been changed, 
so far as I can hitherto determine by records. 
And I havedone it the more freely, because to you, 
who understand the many abuses which they of 
the Roman church have put upon the world, it 
will scarce be ungrateful to be convinced of one 
more than is commonly believed. For although 
the more learned and quick-sighted men, as 
Luther, Erasmus, Bullinger, Grotius, and some 
B 


2 


others, would not dissemble their knowledge, yet 
the generality are fond of the place for its making 
against heresy. But whilst we exclaim against 
the pious frauds of the Roman church, and make 
it a part of our religion to detect and renounce all 
things of that kind, we must acknowledge it a 
greater crime in us to favour such practices, than 
in the Papists we so much blame on that account : 
for they act according to their religion, but we 
contrary to ours. In the Eastern nations, and 
for a long time in the Western, the faith sub- 
sisted without this text; and it is rather a danger 
to religion, than an advantage, to make it now 
lean upon a bruised reed. There cannot be better 
service done to the truth, than to purge it of 
things spurious : and therefore knowing your pru- 
dence, and calmness of temper, I am confident I 
shall not offend you by telling you my mind 
plainly ; especially since it is no article of faith, 
no point of discipline, nothing buta criticism con- 
cerning a text of Scripture which I am going to 
write about. 

IT. The history of the corruption, in short, is 
this. First, some of the Latines interpreted the 
Spirit, Water, and Blood, of the Father, Son, and 
Holy Ghost, to prove them one. Then Jerome, 
for the same end, inserted the Trinity in express . 
words into his version. Out of him the Africans 
began to allege it against the Vandals, about 
sixty-four years after his death. Afterwards the 
Latines noted his variations in the margins of 


3 


their books ; and thence it began at length to 
creep into the text in transcribing, and that 
chiefly in the twelfth and following centuries, 
when disputing was revived by the schoolmen. 
And when printing came up, it crept out of the 
Latine into the printed Greek, against the author- 
ity of all the Greek manuscripts and ancient ver- 
sions; and from the Venetian presses it went 
soon after into Greece. Now the truth of this 
history will appear by considering the arguments 
on both sides. 

III. The arguments alleged for the testimony 
of the Three in Heaven, are the authorities of 
Cyprian, Athanasius, and Jerome, and of many 
Greek manuscripts, and almost all the Latine ones. 

IV. Cyprian’s words’ run thus—‘ the Lord 
saith, ‘I and the Father am one.’ And again of 
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost it is written, 
‘And these Three are One.’” The Socinians here 
deal too injuriously with Cyprian, while they 
would have this place corrupted: for Cyprian in 
another place repeats almost the same thing’. 
“<Tf,”? saith he, [“‘ one baptized among heretics] 
be made the temple of God, tell me, I pray, of 


1 «Dicit Dominus, Ego et pater unum sumus; et iterum 
de patre et filio et spiritu sancto scriptum est, Et tres unum 
sunt.””—Cypr. de Unit. Eccles. 

2 « Si templum Dei factus est, queeso cujus Dei? Si spiri- 
tus sancti, cum tres unum sint, quomodo spiritus sanctus 
placatus ei esse potest, qui aut patris aut filii inimicus est ?’’ 
—Cypr. Epist. 73, ad Jubatanum. 

B 2 


4 


what God? If of the Holy Ghost, since these 
Three are One, how can the Holy Ghost be re- 
conciled to him who is the enemy of either the 
Father or the Son?” These places of Cyprian 
being, in my opinion, genuine, seem so apposite 
to prove the testimony of the Three in Heaven, 
that I should never have suspected a mistake in 
it, could I but have reconciled it with the ignorance 
I meet with of this reading in the next age, 
amongst the Latines of both Africa and Europe, 
as wellas among the Greeks. For had it been 
in Cyprian’s Bible, the Latines of the next age, 
when all the world was engaged in disputing about 
the Trinity, and all arguments that could be 
thought of were diligently sought out, and daily 
brought upon the stage, could never have been 
ignorant of a text, which in our age, now the 
dispute is over, 1s chiefly insisted upon. In re- 
conciling this difficulty, I consider, therefore, that 
the only words of the text quoted by Cyprian in 
both places are, “‘ And these Three are One:” 
which words may belong to the eighth verse as 
well as to the seventh. For Eucherius’ bishop 


1 Eucherius reads the text thus: ‘Tria sunt que testimo- 
nium perhibent; aqua, sanguis, et spiritus.” And then adds 
this interpretation, ‘‘ Plures hicipsam, interpretatione mystica, 
intelligunt Trinitatem ; e6 quod perfecta ipsa perhibeat testi- 
monium Christo: aqua, patrem indicans ; quia ipse de se 
dicit, me dereliquerunt fontem aque vive : sanguine, Christum 
demonstrans, utique per passionis cruorem: spiritu verd 
sanctum spiritum manifestans.”—Eucher. de Quest. N. Test. 


6 


of Lion in France, and contemporary to St. Austin, 
reading the text without the seventh verse, tells 
us, that many then understood the Spirit, the 
Water, and the Blood, to signify the Trinity. 
And St. Austin’ is one of those many; as you 
may see in his third book against Maximus, where 
he tells us, that ‘“‘the Spirit is the Father, for 
God is a Spirit: the Water the Holy Ghost, for 
he is the Water which Christ gives to them that 
thirst: and the Blood the Son, for the Word was 
made flesh.” Now if it was the opinion of many 
in the Western churches of those times, that the 
Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, signified the 
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; it is plain 
that the testimony of Three in Heaven, in express 


1 “ Sané falli te nolo in epistol& Joannis Apostoli, ubi ait, 
‘tres sunt testes, spiritus, aqua, et sanguis, et tres unum sunt ;’ 
ne forté dicas, spiritum et aquam et sanguinem diversas esse 
substantias, et tamen dictam [dictum] esse, tres unum sunt. 
Propter hoc admonui te, ne fallaris: hec enim sunt, in qui- 
bus non quid sint, sed quid ostendant, semper attenditur. Si 
verd ea, que his significata sunt, velimus inquirere ; non ab- 
surdé occurrit ipsa Trinitas, que unus, solus, summus est 
Deus, pater et filius et spiritus sanctus; de quibus verissimé 
dici potuit, tres sunt testes, et tres unum sunt: ut nomine 
spiritds significatum accipiamus Deum patrem, (de Deo ipo 
quippe adorando loquebatur Dominus, ubi ait, ‘spiritus est 
Deus ;’) nomine autem sanguinis, filium; quia verbum caro 
factum est: nomine autem aquz, spiritum sanctum. Com 
enim de aqua loqueretur Jesus, quam daturus erat sitientibus, 
ait evangelista ; ‘Hoc autem dicit de spiritu, quem accepturi 
erant credentes in eum.’”-—~-D, Augustin. cont. Maximum, 
lib. iii, cap. xxii. 


6 


words, was not yet crept into their books: and 
even without this testimony, it was obvious for 
Cyprian, or any man else of that opinion, to say 
of the Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, “ it is 
written, ‘ And these Three are One.’” And that 
this was Cyprian’s meaning, Facundus’, an Afri- 
can bishop in the sixth century, is my author ; 
for he tells us expressly that Cyprian, in the 
above-mentioned place, understood it so, inter- 
preting the Water, Spirit, and Blood, to be the 


1 Facundus, in the beginning of his book to the Emperor 
Justinian, Pro Defensione trium Capitulorum Consilii Chal- 
cedonensis, first recites the text after the manner of Cyprian, 
but more distinctly in these words : ‘‘ Nam Joannes aposto- 
lus, in epistolé sud, de patre et filio et spiritu sancto sic dicit, 
‘Tres sunt, qui testimonium dant in terra, spiritus, aqua, et 
sanguis ; et hi tres unum sunt ;’ in spiritu significans patrem, 
&c. Joan. iv. 21. In aqua spiritum sanctum, Joan. vii. 37 ; 
in sanguine vero filium.” And a little after he thus confirms 
this interpretation by Cyprian’s authority, saying, ‘‘ Aut si 
forsan ipsi, qui de verbo contendunt, in eo quod dixit, ‘Tres 
sunt qui testificantur in terra, spiritus, aqua, et sanguis, et hi 
tres unum sunt,’ Trinitatem nolunt intelligi; secundum ipsa 
verba que posuit, pro apostolo Joanne respondeant. Num- 
quid hi tres, qui in terra testificari, et qui unum esse dicuntur, 
possunt spiritus et aque et sanguines dici? Quod tamen 
Joannis apostoli testimonium B. Cyprianus Carthaginensis, 
antistes et martyr, in epistolé sive libro quem de Triuitate, 
immo de Unitate Ecclesie scripsit, de patre, filio, et spiritu 
sancto dictum intelligit: ait enim, ‘ dicit dominus, ego et pa- 
ter unum sumus; et iterum de patre, filio, et spiritu sancto 
scriptum est, et hi tres unum sunt.’ ’—Facund, lib. i. p. 16; 
ex edit. Sirmondi, Parisiis, 1629, 


? 


Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and thence affirm- 
ing that John said of the Father, Son, and Holy 
Ghost, ‘‘ these Three are One.” This at least 
may be gathered from this passage of Facundus, 
that some in those early ages interpreted Cyprian 
after this manner. Nor do I understand how any 
of those many who took the Spirit, Water, and 
Blood, for a type of the Trinity ; or any man else, 
who was ignorant of the testimony of the Three 
in Heaven, as the churches in the times of the 
Ariancontroversy generally were, could understand 
him otherwise. And even Cyprian’s own words 
do plainly make for the interpretation. For he 
does not say, ‘‘ the Father, the Word, and the 
Holy Ghost,” as it is now in the seventh verse ; 
but “ the Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost,” as 
it is in baptism ; the place from which they tried * 
at first to derive the Trinity. If it be pretended, 
that the words cited by Cyprian are taken out of 
the seventh verse, rather than out of the eighth, 
because he reads not, “ Hi Tres in Unum sunt,” 
but * Hi Tres Unum sunt ;’ I answer, that the 
Latines generally read, ‘* Hi Tres Unum sunt,” 
as well in the eighth verse, as in the seventh ; as 
you may see in the newly cited places of St. 
Austin and Facundus, and those of Ambrose, 
Pope Leo, Beda, and Cassiodorus, which follow, 


* The insinuation contained in this expression, that the 
Trinity ts not to be derived from the words prescribed for the 
baptismal form, is very extraordinary to come from a writer — 
who was no Socinian.—Bp. Horsley. 


8 


and in the present vulgar Latine. So then the 
testimony of Cyprian respects the eighth, or at 
least i3 as applicable tothat verse as tu the seventh, 
and therefore is of no force for proving the treth 
of the seventh : but on the contrary, for disprov- 
ing it we have here the testimony of Facundus, 
St. Austin, Eucherius, and those many others 
whom Eucherius mentions. For if those of that 
age had met with it in their books, they would 
never have understood the Spirit, the Water, and 
the Blood, to be the Three Persons of the Trinity, 
in order to prove them One God. 

V. These passages in Cyprian may receive 
further light by a like passage in Tertullian, from 
whence Cyprian seems to have borrowed them ; 
for it is well known that Cyprian was a great ad- 
mirer of Tertullian writings, and read them 
frequently, calling Tertullian his master. The 
passage is this': “The connection of the Father 
in the Son, and of the Son in the Paraclete, makes 
three coherent ones from one another, which Three 
are One (one thing, not one person,) as it is said, 
‘I and the Father are One ;’ denoting the Unity 
of substance, not the singularity of number.” 
Here, you see, Tertullian says not, ‘‘ the Father, 
Word, and Holy Ghost,” as the text now has it, 


1 «* Connexus patris in filio, et filii in paracleto, tres efficit 
coherentes, alterum ex altero, ‘qui Tres Unum sunt,’ (non 
Unus) quomodo dictum est, ‘Ego et Pater Unum sumus ;’ ad 
substantie unitatem, non ad numeri singularitatem."’ — Ter- 
tullian. advers. Praz. cap. 25. 


9 


but “ the Father, Son, and Paraclete ;” nor cites 
anything more of the text than these words, 
“which Three are One.” Though this treatise 
against St. Praxeas be wholly spent in discoursing 
about the Trinity, and all texts of Scripture are 
cited to prove it, and this text of St. John, as we 
now read it, would have been one of the most 
obvious and apposite to have been cited at large, 
yet Tertullian could find no more obvious words 
in it for his purpose than “‘ these Three are One.” 
These, therefore, he interprets of the Trinity, and 
inforces the interpretation by that other text, “I 
and the Father are One;” as if the phrase was of 
the same importance in both places. 

VI. So then this interpretation seems to have 
been invented by the Montanists for giving coun- 
tenance to their Trinity. For Tertullian was a 
Montanist when he wrote this; and it is most 
likely that so corrupt and forced an interpretation 
had its rise among a sect of men accustomed to 
make bold with the Scriptures. Cyprian being 
used to it in his master’s writings, it seems from 
thence to have dropt into his: for this may be 
gathered from the likeness between their citations. 
And by the disciples of these two great men, it 
seems to have been propagated among those many 
Latins, who (as Eucherius tells us) received it in 
the next age, understanding the Trinity by the 
“‘ Spirit, Water, and Blood.” For how, without 
the countenance of some such authority, an in- 
terpretation so corrupt and strained should come 

BS | 


10 


to be received in that age so generally, [ do not 
understand. 

VII. And what is said of the testimony of Ter- 
tullian and Cyprian, may be much more said 
of that in the feigned disputation of Athanasius 
with Arius at Nice. For there the words cited 
are only ‘‘xat ot rpetg To év evo,” ‘and these 
Three are One ;” and they are taken out of the 
seventh verse, without naming the persons of the 
Trinity before them. For the Greeks interpreted 
‘the Spirit, Water, and Blood,” of the Trinity, 
as well as the Latins ; as is manifest from the an- 
notations they made on this text in the margin of 
some of their manuscripts. For Father Simon' 
informs us that in one of the manuscripts in the 
library of the king of France, marked numb. 
2247, over against these words, “‘ ort rpeg evow 
ol MAPTVUPOVYTESE CY TY yn’; TO Tve€uMa Kal TO vowp 
Kat to aiza,” “‘for there are Three that bear re- 
cord [in earth,] the Spirit, the Water, and the 
Blood ;” there is this remark, “ rovreott, To 
WVEULA TO AyLOY, KALO TATHP, Kat aUToOG EavToOU,” 
“that is, the Holy Ghost, and the Father, and 
He of Himeelf.”” And in the same copy over 
against these words, “‘ cat ot TpetG etc TO Ev Etat,” 
‘Sand these Three are One ;” this note is added, 
“roureott, uta Oecorne, etc Oeoc,” that is, ‘One 
Deity, One God.” This manuscript is about 500 
years old. 


1 Critical History of the New Testament: cap. 18. 
3 Suspicor verba sv ry yw non extare in MS. 


11 


VIII. Also in the margin of one of the manu- 
scripts in Monsieur Colbert’s library, numb. 871, 
Father Simon tells us there is a like remark. For 
besides these words, ‘‘ ete Qeoc, pra Oeorne, ” 
“One God, One Godhead;” there are added, 
“paprupia tov Qeov rov mutpocg Kat Tov aytou 
wveupatoc.” ‘The testimony of God, the Father, 
and of the Holy Ghost.” These marginal notes 
sufficiently show how the Greeks used to apply 
this text to the Trinity ; and by consequence how 
the author of that disputation is to be understood. 
But I should tell you also, that that disputation 
was not writ by Athanasius, but by a later author, 
and therefore, as a spurious piece, uses not to be 
much insisted upon. 

IX. Now this mystical application of ‘‘ the 
Spirit, Water, and Blood,” to signify the Trinity, 
seems to me to have given occasion to somebody, 
either fraudulently to insert the testimony of ‘‘ the 
Three in Heaven ” in express words into the text, 
for proving the Trinity; or else to note it in the 
margin of his book, by way of interpretation ; 
whence it might afterwards creep into the text in 
transcribing. And the first upon record that in- 
serted it, is Jerome ; if the preface’ to the canoni- 


1 The whole preface runs thus: ‘“ Incipit prologus in epi- 
stolas canonicas. Non ita est ordo apud Grecos, qui integré 
sapiunt, fidemque rectam sectantur, epistolarum septem, que 
canonice nuncupantur, sicut in Latinis codicibus invenitur : 
ut quia Petrus est primus in ordine apostolorum, prime sint 
etiam ejus epistole in ordine ceterarum. Sed sicut evange- 


12 


cal epistles, which goes under his name, be his. 
For whilst he composed not a new translation of 
the New Testament, but only corrected the an- 
cient vulgar Latin (as learned men think), and 
among his emendations (written perhaps at first 
in the margin of his book) he inserted this testi- 
mony; he complains in the said preface, how he 
was thereupon accused* by some of the Latins 
for falsifying Scripture ; and makes answer, that 


listas dudum ad veritatis lineam correximus, ita has proprio 
.ordini, Deo juvante, reddidimus. Est enim una earum prima 
Jacobi, duz Petri, tres Johannis, et Jude una. Que si sicut 
ab eis digeste sunt, ita quoque ab interpretibus fideliter in 
Latinum verterentur eloquium, nec ambiguitatem legentibus 
facerent, nec sermonum sese varietates impugnarent, illo pre- 
cipué loco ubi de Unitate Trinitatis in prima Johannis epistol4, 
positum legimus, &c. In qu etiam ab infidelibus translato- 
ribus, multum erratum esse 4 fidei veritate comperimus, trium 
tantummodo vocabula, hoc est, Aquz, Sanguinis, et Spiritds, 
in ips& sua editione ponentibus: et Patris, Verbique, ac Spi- 
ritas testimonium omittentibus ; in quo maximé et fides ca- 
tholica roboratur, et patris, ac filii, et spiriths una divinitatis 
substantia comprobatur. In ceteris verd epistolis, quantum 
4 nostra aliorum distet editio, lectoris judicio derelinquo. Sed 
tu, virgo Christi Eustochium, dum & me impensius scripturee 
veritatem inquiris, meam quodammodo senectutem invidorum 
dentibus corrodendam exponis, qui me falsarium, corruptorem- 
que sanctarum pronunciant scripturarum. Sed ego, in tali 
opere, nec emulorum meorum invidiam pertimesco, nec Sanc- 
te Scripture veritatem poscentibus denegabo.” 

* Jerome complains not of any accusation raised upon what 
he had done in this or any other particular text of Scripture. 
He affirms, that this text was unfaithfully rendered in the 
Latin Bibles, which were current in his time before his own 


13 hg 


former Latin translators had much erred from the 
faith, in putting only ‘‘the Spirit, Water, and 
Blood,” in their edition, and omitting the testi- 
mony of ‘the Three in Heaven,” whereby the 
Catholic faith is established. In his defence he 
seems to say, that he corrected the vulgar Latin 
translation by the original Greek ; and this is the 
great testimony the text relies upon. 

X. But whilst he confesses it was not in the 
Latin before, and accuses former translators of 
falsifying the Scriptures in omitting it, he satis- 
fies us that it has crept into the Latin since his 
time, and so cuts off all the authority of the pre- 
sent vulgar Latin for justifying it. And whilst 
he was accused by his contemporaries of falsify- 
ing the Scriptures in inserting it, this accusation 
also confirms, that he altered the public reading. 
For had the reading been dubious before he made 
it so, no man would have charged him with fal- 
sification for following either part. Also whilst, 
upon this accusation, he recommends the altera- 
tion by its usefulness for establishing the Catho- 
lic faith, this renders it the more suspected ; by 
discovering both the design of his making it, and 
the ground of his hoping for success. However, 
seeing he was thus accused by his contempora- 


edition. That his edition, in this as well as in other passages, 
faithfully represented the original Greek ; and he expresses an 
_ apprehension, that the number of his emendations, which the 
infidelity of former translators had rendered necessary, might 
Surnish his enemies with a pretence for abuse.—Bp. Horsley. 


14 


ries, it gives us just reason to examine the busi« 
ness between him and his accusers. And so, he 
being called to the bar, we are not to lay stress 
upon his own testimony for himself, (for no man 
is a witness in his own cause,) but laying aside 
all prejudice, we ought, according to the ordinary 
rules of justice, to examine the business between 
him and his accusers by other witnesses. 

XI. They that have been conversant in his 
writings, observe a strange liberty which he takes 
in asserting things. Many notable instances of 
this he has left us in c¢mposing those very fa- 
bulous lives of Paul and Hilarion, not to men- 
tion what he has written upon other occasions. 
Whence Erasmus said of him, that he was in af- 
firming things, ‘‘ frequently violent and impudent, 
and often contrary to himself’.” But I accuse 
him not. It is possible that he might be some- 
times imposed upon, or, through inadvertency, 
commit a mistake. Yet since his contemporaries 
accused him, it is but just that we should lay 
aside the prejudice of his great name, and hear 
the cause impartially between them. 

XII. Now the witnesses between them are 
partly the ancient translators of the Scriptures 
into the various languages ; partly the writers of 
his own age, and of the ages next before and 


1 «« Seepe numero violentus, parumque pudens, sepe varius, 
parumque sibi constans.”—Erasmi Annotation. in Johan. v. 7. 

Vide etiam que Erasmus contra Leum in hunc locum de 
Hieronymo fusits dixit. . 


16 


after him; and partly the Scribes who have 
copied out the Greek manuscripts of the Scrip- 
tures in all ages. And all these are against him. 
For by the unanimous evidence of all these, it 
will appear that the testimony of ‘‘ the Three in 
Heaven” was wanting in the Greek manuscripts, 
from whence Jerome, or whoever was the author 
of that preface to the canonical epistles, pretends 
to have borrowed it. 

XIII. The ancient interpreters, which I cite 
as witnesses against him, are chiefly the authors 
of the ancient vulgar Latin, of the Syriac, and 
the Ethiopic versions. For as he tells us, that 
the Latins omitted the testimony of ‘‘ the Three 
in Heaven” in their version before his time, so in 
the Syriac and Ethiopic versions, (both which, 
from bishop Walton’s account of them, are much 
ancienter than Jerome’s time, being the versions 
which the Oriental and AXthiopic nations received 
from the beginning, and generally used, as the 
Latins did the vulgar Latin,) that same testimony 
is wanting to this day ; and the authors of these 
three most ancient, most famous, and most re- 
ceived versions, by omitting it, are concurrent 
witnesses, that they found it wanting in the ori- 
ginal Greek manuscripts of their own times. It 
is wanting also in other ancient versions; as in 
the Egyptian Arabic, published in Walton’s 
Polyglot; in the Armenian version’, used, ever 


' «« Codex Armeniacus ante 400 annos exaratus, quem vidi 
apud Episcopum Ecclesiz Armeniace, que Amstelodami col- 


16 


since Chrysostom’s age, by the Armenian na- 
tions; and in the Illyrican' of Cyrillus, used in 
Rascia, Bulgaria, Moldavia, Russia, Muscovy, 
and other countries, which use the Sclavonic 
tongue. Ina copy of this version’, printed at 
Ostrobe (Ostrow) in Volhinia, in the year 1581, 
I have seen it wanting; and one Camillus® re- 
lates the same thing out of ancient manuscripts 
of this version seen by him. Father Simon notes 
it wanting also in a certain version of the French 
church, which, saith he, is at least 1000 years 
old, and which was published. by Father Mabillon, 
a Benedictine monk. Nor do I know of any ver- 
sion wherein it is extant, except the modern vul- 
gar Latin, and such modern versions, of the 
Western nations, as have been influenced by it. 
So then, by the unanimous consent of all the an- 
cient and faithful interpreters which we have hi- 
therto met with, (who doubtless made use of the 
best manuscripts they could get,) the testimony 


ligitur, locum illum non legit.”—Sandius Append. Interpret. 
Paradox. inh. l. 

1 The printed Sclavonic version runs thus: ‘ Quia Tres 
sunt qui testificantur, Spiritus, et Aqua, et Sanguis; et Tres 
in Unum sunt. Si testimonium,”’ &c. 

2 «Testimonium trium in Colo non est in antiquissimis 
Iilyricorum et Ruthenorum codicibus; quorum unum exem- 
plar, 4 sexcentis feré annis manuscriptum, jampridem apud 
illustrissimum Gabrielem Chineum, terre Bactrice Dominum 
vidi, et legi: alterum manibus nostris teritur, fide et anti- 
quitate sua nobile.”—Camillus de Antichristo, lib. ii. cap. 2. 
pag. 156. 


17 


of ‘‘ the Three in Heaven” was not anciently in 
the Greek. 

XIV. And that it was neither in the ancient 
versions nor in-the Greek, but was wholly un- 
known to the first churches, is most certain by 
an argument hinted above; namely, that in all 
that vehement, universal, and lasting controversy 
about the Trinity in Jerome’s time, and both be- 
fore and long enough after it, this text of “ the 
Three in Heaven” was never once thought of. It 
is now in everybody’s mouth, and accounted the 
main text for the business, and would assuredly 
have been so too with them, had it been in their 
books. And yet it is not once to be met with 
in all the disputes, epistles, orations, and other 
writings of the Greeks and Latins (Alexander of 
Alexandria, Athanasius, the council of Sardica, 
Basil, Nazianzen, Nyssen, Epiphanius, Chrysos- 
tom, Cyril, Theodoret, Hilary, Ambrose, Austin, 
Victorinus Afer, Philastrius Brixiensis, Phzebe- 
dius Agennensis, Gregorius Beticus, Faustinus 
Diaconus, Paschasius, Arnobius Junior, Cerealis 
and others,) in the times of those controversies ; 
no, not in Jerome himself; if his version and pre- 
face to the canonical epistles be excepted. The 
writings of those times were very many, and co- 
pious; and there is no argument, or text of Scrip- 
ture, which they do not urge again and again. 
That of St. John’s gospel, “‘ I and the Father am 
One,” is everywhere inculcated, but this of ‘‘ the 
Three in Heaven, and their being One,’’ is no- 


18 


where to be met with, till at length, when the 
ignorant ages came on, it began by degrees to 
creep into the Latin copies out of Jerome’s ver- 
sion. So far are they from citing the testimony of 
“‘the Three in Heaven,” that, on the contrary, 
as often as they have occasion to mention the 
place, they omit it, and that too, as well after 
Jerome’s age, as in and before it. For Hesy- 
chius’ cites the place thus: ‘“‘ Audi Johannem 
dicentem, Tria sunt qui testimontum prebent, et 
Tres Unum sunt, spiritus, et sanguis, et aqua.” 
The words ‘én terra’ he omits, which is never 
done, but in copies where ‘‘ the Three in Heaven” 
is wanting. Cassiodorus, or whoever was the 
author of the Latin version of the discourse of 
Clemens Alexandrinus on these epistles of St. 
John, reads it thus: “ Quia tres sunt, qui testifi- 
cantur, spiritus, et aqua, et sanguts; et hi Tres 
Unum sunt*.”” Beda, in his commentary on the 
place, reads it thus: ‘* Et spiritus est qua testafi- 
cutur, quoniam Christus est veritas. Quoniam 
Tres sunt, qui testimonium dant in terra, spiritus, 
aqua, et sanguis, et Tres Unum sunt. St testimo- 
nium,” &c. But here the words, in ‘terra,’ so far 
as I can gather from his commentary on this 
text, have been inserted by some latter hand. 
The author of the first epistle, ascribed to Pope 
Eusebius, reads it, as Beda doth, omitting only 
the words, in terrd. And if the authority of popes 


1 Hesych. in Levit. lib. ii. c. 8. post med. 
2 Cassiodor, in Bibl, 8S. Patr. edit. Paris. 1589, 


19 


be valuable, Pope Leo the Great, in his tenth 
epistle, thus cites the place: “ Et spiritus est qui 
testificatur, quontam spiritus est veritas ; quia Tres 
sunt qui testimonium dant, spirttus, et aqua, et 
sanguis; et hi Tres Unum sunt.’’ St. Ambrose, 
in the sixth chapter of his first book, De Spiritu 
Sancto, disputing for the unity of the Three Per- 
sons, says, “‘ Hi Tres Unum sunt, Johannes dizit, 
aqua, sanguis, et spiritus: Unum tx mysterio, non 
in natura.” This is all he could find of the text, 
while he was disputing about the Trinity, and 
therefore he proves the unity of the persons by 
the mystical unity of the Spirit, Water, and 
Blood: interpreting these of the Trinity with Cy- 
prian and others. Yea, in the eleventh chapter 
of his third book, he fully recites the text thus: 
“ Per aquam et sanguinem venit Christus Jesus, 
non solim in aqua, sed in aqua et sanguine; et 
spirstus testimonium dat, quontam spiritus est ve- 
ritas. Quia Tres sunt testes, spiritus, aqua, et 
sanguis; et hi Tres Unum sunt in Christo Jesu'.”’ 
The like reading of Facundus, Eucherius, and 
St. Austin, you have in the places cited above. 
These are Latins as late, or later, than Jerome ; 
for Jerome did not prevail with the churches of 
his own time to receive the testimony of ‘‘ the 
Three in Heaven.” And for them to know his 
version, and not receive his testimony, was in 
effect to condemn it. 


1 See also Ambrose in Luc. xxii. 10, and in his book, De 
jis qui mysteriis initiantur, cap. 4. 


20 


XV. And as for the Greeks, Cyril of Alexan- 
dria reads the text without this testimony in the 
xivth book of his Thesaurus, cap. 5 ;.and again 
in his first book De Fide ad Reginas, a little 
after the middle; and so does Oecumenius, a 
later Greek, in his commentary on this place of 
St. John’s epistle. Also, Didymus Alexandrinus, 
in his commentary on the same passage, reads, 
** the Spirit, Water, and Blood,” without men- 
tioning “ the Three in Heaven:” and so he doth 
in his book of the Holy Ghost, where he seems 
to omit nothing that he could find for his pur- 
pose: and so doth Gregory Nazianzen in his 
xxxviith oration concerning the Holy Ghost; and 
also Nicetas in his commentary on Gregory Nazi- 
anzen’s xlivth oration: And here it is further ob- 
servable, that, as the Eusebians had contended, 
that “‘ the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost” were 
not to be connumerated, because they were things 
of a different kind; Nazianzen and Nicetas an- 
swer, that they might be connumerated, because 
St. John connumerates three things not sub- 
stantial, namely, ‘‘ the Spirit, the Water, and the 
Blood.” By the objection of the Eusebians, it 
then appears that the testimony of “‘ the Three 
in Heaven” was not in their books; and by the 
answer of the Catholics it is as evident, that it 
was not in theirs; for while they answer by in- 
stancing “the Spirit, Water, and Blood,” they 
could not have missed of ‘‘ the Father, the Word, 
and the Holy Ghost,” had they been connume- 


21 


rated, and called one in the words immediately 
before; and to answer by instancing in these, 
would have been far more to their purpose, be- 
cause it was the very thing in question. In like 
manner the Eunomians, in disputing against the 
Catholics, had objected, that the Holy Ghost is 
nowhere in Scripture conjoined with the Father 
and the Son, except in the form of baptism; which 
is as much as to say, that the testimony of “ the 
Three in Heaven” was not in their books: and 
yet St. Basil’, whilst he is very diligent in re- 
turning an answer to them, and perplexes himself 
in citing places, which are nothing to the pur- 
pose, does not produce this text of “the Three 
in Heaven,” though it be the most obvious, and 
the only proper passage, had it been then in the 
Scriptures ; and therefore he knew nothing of it. 
The objection of the Eunomians, and the answer 
of the Catholics, sufficiently show that it was in 
the bvoks of neither party. Besides all this, the 
tenth epistle of Pope Leo, mentioned above, was 
that very famous epistle to Flavian, patriarch of 
Constantinople, against Eutyches which went 
about through all the churches, both Eastern and 
Western, being translated into Greek, and sent 
about in the East by Flavian. It was generally 
applauded in the West, and read in the council 
of Chalcedon, and there solemnly approved and 
subscribed by all the bishops ; and in this epistle 
the text was thus cited: ‘ Et spiritus est qui 


1 Lib. 5, adversus Eunomium sub finem. 


22 


testificatur, quoniam Christus est veritas; quia 
Tres sunt, qui testtmonium dant, sptritus, aqua, et 
sanguts; et hi Tres Unum sunt.” And by put- 
ting wvevga (according to the Greek reading’) for 
Christus, which is still the vulgar Latin, it was 
thus translated by the Greeks: “‘ cat ro mveupa 
eoTtly TO faprupour’ eretdn TO Wvevpa EOTLY y 
aXdnOea’ rperc yap craw ot Haprupowrec, To 
hd aoe. Kat TO vowp, Kat TO aina, Kat ol TPElG TO 
ev erat.” So then we have the reading, quoted 
by the Pope, owned in the West, and solemnly 
subscribed in the East by the fourth general 
council, and therefore it continued the publie re- 
ceived reading in both the East and West, till 
after the age of that council. 

XVI. So then the testimony of “‘ the Three in 
Heaven,” which, in the times of these controver- 
sies, would have been in everybody’s mouth, had 
it been in their books, was. wholly unknown to 
the churches of those ages. All that they could 
find in their books was the testimony of “‘ the 
Water, the Spirit, and the Blood.” Will you 
now say, that the testimony of “‘the Three in 
Heaven” was razed out of their books by the 
prevailing Arians? Yes, truly, those Arians were 
crafty knaves, that could conspire so cunningly 
and slily all the world over at once (as at the 
word of a Mithridates) in the latter end of the 
reign of the emperor Constantius, to get all men’s 
books in their hands, and correct them without 
being perceived: ay, and conjurors too, to do it 


23 


without leaving any blot or chasm in their books, 
whereby the knavery might be suspected and 
discovered ; and to wipe away the memory of it 
out of all men’s brains, so that neither Athana- 
sius, or anybody else, could afterwards remember 
that they had ever seen it in their books before ; 
and out of their own books too; so that when 
they turned to the consubstantial faith, as they 
generally did in the West, soon after the death of 
Constantius, they could then remember no more 
of it than anybody else. Well, then, it was out 
of their books in Jerome’s age, when he pretended 
it was in; which is the point we are to prove; 
and when anybody can show, that it was in their 
books before, it may be pertinent to consider that 
point also; but till then we are only to inquire 
how, since it was out, it came into the copies that 
are now extant. For they that, without proof, 
accuse the heretics of corrupting books, and upon 
that pretence correct them at their pleasure with- 
out the authority of ancient manuscripts, as some 
learned men of the fourth and fifth centuries used 
to do, are falsaries by their own confession, and 
certainly need no other confutation. And there- 
fore if this reading was once out, we are bound 
in justice to believe, that it was out from the be- 
ginning ; unless the razing of it out can be proved 
by some better argument than that of pretence 
and clamour. 

XVII. Will you now say, that Jerome followed 
some copy different from any which the Greeks 


24 


were acquainted with? This is to overthrow the 
authority of his version by making him depart 
from the received Greeks; and besides, it is con- 
trary to what he himself seems to represent; for 
in his blaming not the vulgar Greek copies, but 
the Latin interpreters only, which were before 
his time, as if they had varied from the received 
Greek, he represents that he himself followed it. 
He does not excuse and justify himself for read- 
ing differently from the received Greek, to follow 
a private copy, but accuses former interpreters, as 
if, in leaving out the testimony of ‘‘ the Three 
in Heaven,” they had not followed the received 
Greek, as he did. And, therefore, since the Greeks 
knew nothing of this testimony, the authority of 
his version sinks; and that the rather, because 
he was then accused of corrupting the text, and 
could not persuade either the Greeks or the Latins 
of those times to receive his reading; for the 
Latins received it not till many years after his 
death; and the Greeks not till this present age, 
when the Venetians sent it amongst them in 
printed books; and their not receiving it was 
plainly to approve the accusation. 

XVIII. The authority of this version being 
thus far discussed, it remains, that we consider 
the authority of the manuscripts wherein we now 
read the testimony of *‘ the Three in Heaven.” 
And by the best inquiry that I have been able to 
make, it is wanting in the manuscripts of all lan- 
guages but the Latin. For, as we have shown, 


25 


that the Athiopic, Syriac, Arabic, Armenian, and 
Sclavonian versions, still in use in the several 
Eastern nations, Ethiopia, Egypt, Syria, Mesopo- 
tamia, Armenia, Muscovy, and some others, are 
strangers to this reading, and that it was anciently 
wanting also in the French; so I am told by 
those who have been in Turkey, that it is want- 
ing to this day in the Greek manuscripts, which 
have been brought from those parts into the 
West; and that the Greeks, now that they have 
got it in print from the Venetians, when their 
manuscripts are objected against it, pretend that 
the Arians razed it out. A reading to be found 
in no manuscripts but the Latin, and not in the 
Latin before Jerome’s age, as Jerome himself con- 
fesses, can be but of little authority: and this 
authority sinks, because we have already proved 
the reading spurious, by showing that it was 
heretofore unknown, both to the Western and the 
Eastern churches, in the times of the great con- 
troversy about the Trinity. But, however, for 
further satisfaction, we shall now give you an ac- 
count of the Latin and Greek manuscripts; and 
show, first, how, in the dark ages, it crept into 
the Latin manuscripts out of Jerome’s version ; 
and then how it lately crept out of the Latin into 
the printed Greek without the authority of manu- 
scripts; those who first published it in Greek 
having never yet so much as seen it in any Greek 
manuscript. 

XIX. That the vulgar Latin, now in use, is a 

Cc 


26 


mixture of the old vulgar Latin, and of Jerome’s 
version together, is the received opinion. Few of 
these manuscripts are above four or five hundred 
years old. The latest generally have the testi- 
mony of “‘ the Three in Heaven:” the oldest of 
all usually want it, which shows that it has crept 
in by degrees. Erasmus notes it to be wanting 
in three very ancient ones, one of which was in 
the Pope’s library at Rome, the other two were 
at Bruges; and he adds, that in another manu- 
script belonging to the library of the Minorites in 
Antwerp, the testimony of ‘‘ the Three in Heaven” 
was noted in the margin in a newer hand. Peter 
Cholinus notes in the margin of his Latin edition 
of the Scriptures, printed anno Christi 1543 and 
1544, that it was wanting in the most ancient 
manuscript of the Tugurine hbrary. Dr. Gilbert 
Burnet has lately, in the first letter of his travels, 
noted it wanting in five other ones kept at Stras- 
burg, Zurich, and Basil; one of which manu- 
scripts he reckons about 1000 years old, and the 
other four about 800. F. Simon has noted it 
wanting in five others in the libraries of the king 
of France, Mons. Colbert, and the Benedictines 
of the Abbey of St. Germain’s. An ancient and 
diligent collator of manuscripts, cited by Lucas 
Brugensis by the name of Epanorthotes, notes in 
general, that it was wanting in the ancient Latin 
manuscripts. Lucas himself, collating many Latin 
ones, notes it to be wanting in only jive, that is, 
in the few old ones he had, his manuscripts being 


27 


almost all of them new ones. For he praises’ 
the Codex Lobiensis written anno Christi 1084, 
and the Codex Tornacensis written anno Christi 
1105, as most ancient and venerable for their 
antiquity ; and used others much more new, of 
which a great number was easily had; such as 
was the Codex Buslidianus, written anno Christi 
1432, that is, but eight years before the inven- 
tion of printing. The Lateran council, collected 
under Innocent the Third, anno Christi 1215, 
canon 2, mentions Joachim, the abbot, quoting 
the text in these words: ‘‘ Quoniam in canonicd 
Johannis epistola (legitur,| Quia Tres sunt qui 
testimonium dant in celo, Pater, et Verbum, et 
Spiritus; et hi Tres Unum sunt: statimque sub- 
jungitur: Et Tres sunt qui testimonium dant in 
terra, Spiritus, Aqua, et Sanguis, et Tres Unum 
sunt: sicut in codicibus quibusdam invenitur.”’ 
This was written by Joachim® in the papacy of 
Alexander the Third, that is, in or before the year 
1180, and therefore this reading was then got 
but into some books; for the words ‘‘ stcut in co- 
dicibus quibusdam invenitur’’ refer .as well to the 
first words of Joachim, ‘‘ guoniam in canonicad Jo- 
hannis epistola legitur,”’ as to the text [next], ‘“‘sta- 
timque subjungitur;”’ and:-more to the first than the 
text [next], because the first part of the citation was 
then but in some books, as appears by ancient 
manuscripts ; but the second part was in almost 
1 Lucas Brug. in calce annot. 
3 Vide Math. Paris Histor. Angl. A.D. 1179. 
c 2 


28 


all: the words ‘‘ Tres Unum sunt” being in all 
the books which wanted the testimony of ‘‘ the 
Three in Heaven,” and in most of those which had 
it; though afterwards left out in many, when 
branded by the schoolmen for Arian. 

XX. But to go to the original of the corrup 
tion. Gregory the great' writes, that Jerome’s 
version was in use in his time, and therefore no 
wonder if the testimony of “‘ the Three in Heaven” 
began to be cited out of it before. Eugenius 
bishop of Carthage, in the seventh year of Hun- 
neric king of the Vandals, anno Christi 484, in 
the summary of his faizh exhibited to the king, 
cited it the first of any man, so far as I can find. 
A while after, Fulgentius, another African bishop, 
disputing against the same Vandals, cited it again, 
and backed it with the forementioned place of Cy- 
prian, applied to the testimony of ‘‘the Three in 
Heaven.” And so it is probable, that by that 
abused authority of Cyprian it began first in Afric, 
in the disputes with the ignorant Vandals, to get 
some credit; and thence at length crept into use. 
It occurs also frequently in Vigilius Tapsensis, 
another African bishop, contemporary to Fulgen- 
tius. In its defence, some allege earlier writers ; 
namely, the first epistle of Pope Hyginus, the 
first epistle of Pope John ITI. the book of Idacius 
Clarus against Varimadus; and the book, De 
unité Deitate Trinitatis, ascribed to Athanasius. 
But Chiffletius, who published the works of 

1 Vide Walton’s Prolegomena, x. 5. 


29 


Victor Vitensis and Vigilius Tapsensis, suffiim 
ciently proves the book against Varimadus to be 
this Vigilius’s, and erroneously ascribed to Ida- 
cius. To the same Vigilius he asserts also the 
book De unitd Deitate Trinitatis. Certainly 
Athanasius was not its author. All the epistles of 
Hyginus, except the beginning and the end, and 
the first part of the epistle of Pope John, where 
the testimony of ‘‘ the Three in Heaven” is cited, 
are nothing else than fragments of the book 
against Varimadus, described word by word by 
soie forger of decretal epistles, as may appear 
by comparing them. So then Eugenius is the 
first upon record that quotes it. 

XXI. But though he set it on foot among the 
Africans, yet I cannot find that it became of au- 
thority in Europe before the revival of learning 
in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. In those 
ages St. Barnard, the Schoolmen, Joachim, and 
the Lateran council, spread it abroad, and scribes 
began generally to insert it into the text; but in 
such in Latin manuscripts and European writers, 
as are ancienter than those times, it is scarce to 
be met with. 

XXII. Now that it was inserted into the vul- 
gar Latin out of Jerome’s version, is manifest by 
the manner how the vulgar Latin and that version 
came to be mixed. For it is agreed that the 
Latines, after Jerome’s version began to be of use, 
noted out of it his corrections of the vulgar La- 
tin in the margin of their books; and these the 


30 

transcribers afterwards inserted into the text. 
By this means, the old Latin has been so gene- 
rally corrected, that it is nowhere to be found 
sincere. It is Jerome that we now read, and 
not the old vulgar Latin; and what wonder, if 
in Jerome we read the testimony of ‘‘ the Three 
in Heaven?” For who that inserted the rest 
of Jerome into the text, would leave out such a 
passage for the Trinity, as this hath been taken 
to be ? 

XXIII. But to put the question out of dis- 
pute, there are footsteps of the insertion still re- 
maining. For in some old manuscripts it has 
been found noted in the margin; in others, the 
various readings are such as ought to arise, by 
transcribing it out of the margin into the text. I 
shall only mention the three following varieties. 
Of the manuscripts which have not the testimony 
of ‘the Three in Heaven,” some have the words 
tn terrd, in the eighth verse, but the most want 
it ; which seems to proceed from hence, that some, 
before they allowed so great an addition to the 
text, as the testimony of ‘‘ the Three in Heaven,” 
noted only in terra in the margin of their books, 
to be inserted into the testimony of the Spirit, Wa- 
ter,and Blood. Of the manuscripts which have 
the testimony of ‘‘ the Three in Heaven,” some in 
the eighth verse have “‘ Hi Tres Unum sunt ;” 
others not. The reason of this seems to be, that 
of those who noted this testimony in the margin, 
some blotted out ‘6 kt hi Tres Unum sunt” in the 


31 


eighth verse according to Jerome; and others did 
not. And, lastly, the testimony of “‘ the Three 
in Heaven” is in most books set before the testi- 
mony of ‘‘ the Three in earth;” in some, it is set 
after; so Erasmus notes two old books, in which 
it 1s set after; Lucas Brugensis a third; and 
Hesselius (if [ misremember not) a fourth; and 
so Vigilius Tapsensis’ sets it after; which seems 
to proceed from hence, that it was sometimes so 
noted in the margin, that the reader or transcriber 
knew not whether it were to come before or after. 
Now these discords in the Latin manuscripts, as 
they detract from the authority of the manuscripts, 
so they confirm to us, that the old vulgar Latin 
has in these things been tampered with, and cor- 
rected by Jerome’s version. 

XXIV. In the next place, I am to show how, 
and when, the testimony of ‘‘ the Three in Hea- 
ven” crept out of the Latin into the Greek. Those 
who first printed the Greek Testament, did gene- 
rally, in following their manuscripts, omit the 
testimony of “‘ the Three in Heaven,” except in 
Spain ; for it was omitted in the first and second 
edition of Erasmus, anno Christi 1516 and 1519 ; 
in the edition of Francis Asulan, printed at Ve- 
nice by Aldus, anno Christi 1518; in that of 
Nicholas Gerbelius, printed at Haganau, anno 
Christi 1521; and a little after, in that of Wol- 
fius Cephalius, printed at Strasburg, anno Christi 
1524; and againin 1526, in the Badian edition, 


1 Vigilius, libr. advers. Varimadum, cap. 5. 


32 


as Erasmus notes; and in that of Simon Colinzus 
at Paris, anno Christi 1534’. At the same time 
it was omitted in some editions of other Western 
languages, as in the Saxon and German editions 
of Luther; and in the Latin Tugurine editions of 
Peter Cholinus, anno Christi 1543 and 1544. 
The first edition in Greek, which has the testi- 
mony of “‘the Three in Heaven,” was that of 
Cardinal Ximenes, printed at Complutum in 
Spain, in 1515; but not published before the 
year 1521. The Cardinal, in his edition, used 
the assistance of several divines, which he called 
together to Complutum, there founding an uni- 
versity, anno Christi 1517, or a little before. 
Two of those divines were Antonius Nebrissensis 
and Stunica. For Stunica then resided at Com- 
plutum, and in the preface* to a treatise he wrote 
against Erasmus, gives this testimony of himself: 


1 « Tn editis exemplaribus nonnullis non legi; ut in Aldina 
et Badian& editione. Addo, nec in Greco Testamento Ger- 
belii Haganow, 1521; nec in Colinzi Parisiis edito.’’— Go- 
marus inh. l. 

2 «Cum presertim, si quisquam alius, et nos quoque his 
de rebus, nostro quodam jure, judicium ferre possumus. 
[Quippe] qui non paucos annos in sanctis scripturis Veteris 
et Novi Testamenti, Hebraicé, Greecé, et Latiné perlegendis 
consumpserimus; ac Hebraica, Grecaque ipsa divinarum 
literarum exemplaria cum Latinis codicibus diligentissimé 
contulerimus. Longa igitur lectione ac experientia jampridem 
edocti, quantum tralationi huic ecclesiastice Novi Testamenti 
deferendum sit, ni fallor, optimé novi.”—Hec Stunica in 
Proem. libri sui. 


33 


‘‘That he had spent some years in reading the 
holy Scriptures in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin ; 
and had diligently collated the Hebrew and Greek 
exemplars with the Latin copies.” This book, 
displeasing the cardinal, was not printed till after 
his death; and then it came forth at Complutum, 
anno Christi 1520. The year before, one Lee, 
an Englishman, writ also against Erasmus; and 
both Stunica and Lee, amongst other things, re- 
prehended him for omitting the testimony of ‘‘ the 
Three in Heaven.” Afterwards Erasmus, finding 
the Spaniards, and some others of the Roman 
church, in a heat against him, printed this testi- 
mony in his third edition, anno Christi 1522, re- 
presenting, ‘“‘That in his former editions he had 
printed the text as he found it in his manuscripts ; 
but now there being found in England one manu- 
script which had the testimony of ‘the Three in 
Heaven,’ he had inserted it, according to that 
manuscript; for avoiding the calumnies raised 
against him.” And so it continued in his two 
following editions. And at length Robert Ste- 
phens, anno Christi 1550, reprinted Erasmus’s 
edition, with some few alterations and various 
lections, taken out of the Complutensian edition, 
and fifteen Greek manuscripts, which he named 
after the numeral letters a, B, y, 8, e, &c., put- 
ting a for the Complutensian edition, and , y, 9, 
e, &c. for the manuscripts in order; and noting 
in the margin, that the testimony of ‘‘the Three 
in Heaven” was wanting in the seven manuscripts, 
c 5 


34 


8, €, 2, 0, t, ca, ey. Whence Beza’ tells us, that 
he had read it in the rest. His words are, 
“ Legit Hieronymus, legit Erasmus in Britannico 
codice, et in Complutensi editione. Legimus et 
nos in nonnullis Roberti nostri vetertbus libris.” 
And this is the original and authority of the 
printed editions. For these are the editions ever 
since followed by allthe West; and of late years 
propagated by the Venetian presses into Greece ; 
and nothing further, that I know of, has been 
discovered in any manuscripts in favour of these 
editions. 

XXV. Now to pull off the vizard, I cannot 
but, in the first place, extremely complain of 
Beza’s want of modesty and caution in expressing 
himself*. In the preface to his annotations, de- 
acribing what helps he had in composing his first 
edition, he tells us, “‘ That he had the annotations 
of Valla, Stapulensis, and Erasmus, and the 
writings of the ancients and moderns collated by 
himself; and’ out of Stephens’s library, the ex- 
emplar which Stephens had collated with about 
twenty-five manuscripts, almost all of which were 
printed.” He should have said seventeen ; for 
that number he puts in other places, and in his 

1 Beza in hunc locum. 

2 <¢ Non desunt, qui Bezam nimis audacem fuisse judicant, 
dum 4 recepta lectione sepitis sine necessitate recedit; et 
unius, interdum nullius, codicis authoritate fretus, pretoriam 
exercet potestatem, ex conjecturis mutando et interpolando 


textum sacrum pro libitu.”’— Walton. Prolegom. iv. sect. 15, in 
Bibl. Polyglot. 


35 


annotations cites no more. So then he had the 
collations of two more manuscripts than Stephens 
has given us in print. And this was all his 
furniture. The original manuscripts he does not 
here pretend to have; nor could he have them ; 
for they were not Stephens’s manuscripts, but 
belonged to several libraries in France and Italy. 
The manuscript 6 Stephens himself never saw ; 
but had only various lections collected out of it 
by his friends in Italy. The manuscripts y, 4, e, 
s, , 7, t, ce, were not Stephens’s, but belonged to 
the library of the king of France, to whom Ste- 
phens was printer. The other six books, 9, ta, «G3, 
vy, 08, ws, Stephens had not out of his own library, 
but borrowed them for a time from several places 
to collate, his friends studying to promote the de- 
sign of his edition. And yet Beza in his annota- 
tions, when he would favour any text, cites the 
collations of Stephens in such a manner, as if he 
had the very original manuscripts at Geneva before 
his eyes. And where Stephens does not cite va- 
rious lections, there he reckons, that in the text of 
Stephens’s collated books he read all the manu- 
scripts. So in Mark vi. 11, where Stephens notes 
a certain period to be wanting in the manuscript 
copies 8 and n, Beza saith, “‘ Hac periodus in 
omnibus exemplaribus Gracis legitur, evceptis se- 
cundo et octavo.” In the Acts xiii. 33, because 
Stephens had noted novarious|ections, Beza affirms 
of the Greek text, ‘‘ Ita scriptum invenimus in om- 
nibus vetustis codicibus.” In 1 John iv. 3, where 


36 


Stephens is silent, Beza speaks; ‘‘ Sic legitur in 
omnibus Grecis exemplaribus, que quidem mihi 
inspicere licuit.”” In James i. 22, where Stephens 
is again silent, Beza tells us of the word ovoy, 
“Ego in omnibus nostris vetustis libris inveni.” 
And so, where Stephens in the margin had noted 
the testimony of ‘‘ the Three in Heaven” to be 
wanting in seven manuscripts, he thinks that, in 
reading the text of Stephens’s collated book, he 
reads it in the rest; and so tells us, ‘‘ Legimus 
et nos in nonnullis Roberti Stephani codicibus.” 
This he did in the first edition of his annotations. 
Afterwards, when he had got two real manuscripts, 
the Claromontan, and that which at length he 
presented to the University of Cambridge (in both 
which the canonical epistles are wanting) ; in the 
epistle to his fourth edition, in reckoning up the 
books he then used, he puts only these two, and 
the seventeen of Stephens; and in his fifth edi- 
dion he writes summarily, that he used nineteen 
manuscripts, joining with those two real ones the 
collations of Stephens, as if in those he had seven- 
teen others ; which sufficiently explains his way 
of speaking in his annotations. But whilst he 
had not the manuscripts themselves to read with 
his own eyes, it was too hard and unwarrantable 
a way of speaking to tell us, “‘ Legimus et nos 
in nonnullis Roberti Stephani codicibus ;” and 
therefore, in his later editions, he corrects himself, 
and tells us, only, that the reading doth ‘‘ ertare 
in nonnullis Stephani veteribus libris.’’ Thus Beza 


37 


argues from Stephens’s book of collations; and 
the same inference has been made by Lucas Bru- 
gensis and others, ever since, from Stephens’s 
fore-mentioned edition of that book. “ For,” say 
they, ‘Stephens had fifteen manuscripts in all, 
and found the testimony of ‘ the Three in Heaven’ 
wanting butin seven; and therefore it was in the 
other eight; and so being found in the greater 
part of his manuscripts, has the authority and 
manuscripts on its side.”” Thus they argue; and 
this is the great argument by which the printed 
Greek has hitherto been justified. 

XXVI. But if they please to consider the bu- 
siness a little better, they will find themselves 
very much mistaken. For though Stephens had 
fifteen manuscripts in all, yet all of them did not 
contain all the Greek Testament. Four of them, 
noted y, s, «3, «3, had each of them the four 
Gospels only. Two, noted f, 7, contained only 
the Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles. One, 
noted ts, contained the Apocalypse only. One, 
noted te, had only the Apocalypse, with St Paul’s 
Epistles to the Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians, 
Philippians, and Colossians. The other seven, 
noted 9, ¢, Z, 9,1, ta, vy, contained both St. Paul’s 
Epistles and the canonical ones, besides some 
other books ; namely, the manuscript Z contained 
the Epistles and Gospels ; the manuscripts ¢, ta, 
ty, the Epistles and Acts of the Apostles; and 
the manuscripts 6, e, 0, the Epistles, Gospels, 
and Acts. And this any one may gather, by 


ree ee 


38 


noting what manuscripts the various lections are 
cited out of, in every book of the New Testament. 
For in the various lections of the canonical epi- 
stles, and those to the Thessalonians, Timothy, 
Titus, and the Hebrews, are found these seven 
manuscripts, 6, e, Z, 0, «, ta, ey, everywhere 
cited, and no more than these. The same also, 
and no more, are cited in the epistles to the 
Thessalonians, Timothy, Titus, and the Hebrews ; 
one numeral error (whether of the scribe or typo- 
grapher) excepted. Stephens therefore did col- 
lect various lections of the Epistles out of only 
these seven manuscripts, 0, €, Z, 0, «, ta, vy; and 
in all these seven he found the testimony of ‘‘ the 
Three in Heaven” to be wanting; as you may 
see noted in the margin of his edition. 

XXVII. And that this testimony was wanting 
in all Stephens’s manuscripts, is apparent also 
by its being generally wanting in the manuscripts 
which are now extant in France. For Father 
Simon ‘ tells us, “That after a diligent search in 
the library of the king of France, and in that also 
of Monsieur Colbert, he could not find it in any 
one manuscript; though he consulted seven ma- 
nuscripts in the king’s library, and one in Col- 
bert’s.” And because Stephens had some of his 
various lections from Italy, I will add, that a 
gentleman, who, in his travels, had consulted 
twelve manuscripts in several libraries in Italy, 
assured me that he found it wanting in them all. 


1 Simon’s Critical History of the New Test. chap. xviii. 


39° 


One of the twelve was that most ancient and most 
famous manuscript in the Pope’s library, written 
in capital letters. 

XXVIII. So then the authority of the printed 
books rests only upon the authority of the editions 
of Erasmus and Cardinal Ximenes. But seeing 
that Erasmus omitted it in his two first editions, 
and inserted it unwillingly, against the authority 
of his manuscripts, in his three last ; the authority 
of these three can be none at all. When Lee, 
upon Erasmus’s putting forth his second edition, 
fell foul upon him for leaving out the testimony of 
‘‘the Three in Heaven,” Erasmus’ answered, 
‘‘That he had consulted more than seven Greek 
manuscripts, and found it wanting in them all ; 
and that if he could have found it in any one 
manuscript, he would have followed that in favour 
of the Latin.”” Hence notice was sent to Erasmus 
out of England, that it was ina manuscript there ; 
and thereupon to avoid®* their calumnies (as he 
saith) he printed it in his following editions ; not- 
withstanding that he suspected that manuscript 


' “ Dicam mihi diversis temporibus plura fuisse exempla- 
ria quam septem (scilicet Greca] ; nec in ullo horum reper- 
tum, quod in nostris [scilicet Latinis] legitur. Quod si con- 
tigisset unum exemplar, in quo fuisset, quod nos legimus, 
nimirum illine adjecissem, quod in ceteris aberat. Id quia 
non contigit, quod solum licuit, feci; indicavi quid in Grecis 
codicibus minus esset.”’—Hec Erasmus contra Leum, in hunc 
locum. 

2 « Ex hoc igitur codice Britannico reposuimus, quod in 
nostris dicebatur deesse ; ne cui sit ansa calumniandi. Quan- 


40 


to be a new one, corrected by the Latin. But 
since, upon inquiry, I cannot learn that they in 
England ever heard of any such manuscript, but 
from Erasmus; and since he was only told of 
such a manuscript, in the time of the controversy 
between him and Lee, and never saw it himself, 
I cannot forbear to suspect, that it was nothing 
but a trick put upon him by some of the Popish 
clergy, to try if he would make good what he 
had offered, the printing of the testimony of ‘‘ the 
Three in Heaven” by the authority of one Greek 
copy, and thereby to get it into his edition’. 
Greek manuscripts of the Scripture are things of 
value, and do not use to be thrown away; and 
such a manuscript, for the testimony of ‘‘ the 
Three in Heaven,” would have made a greater 
noise than the rest have done against it. Let 
those who have such a manuscript, at Tength tell 
us where it ts. 

XXIX. So also let them, who insist upon the 
edition of cardinal Ximenes, tell us by what manu- 
script he printed this testimony ; or, at least, 
where any such manuscript of good note is to 
be seen; for till then I must take the liberty 
quam et hunc suspicor, et Latinorum codices, fuisse castiga- 
tum. Posteaquam enim concordiam inierunt cum ecclesia 
RomanA, studuerunt et hac in parte cum Romanis consentire.”’ 
—Erasmi Annotation. in hunc locum ; editio tertia, et sequen. 

1 “ Versiculus 1 Joan. v. 7, in Syriac&, ut et vetustissimis 
Grecis exemplaribus, nostro Alexandrino, aliis manuscriptis 
Grecis, quos contulimus, non reperitur.”—Walton. Prole- 
gomena, xiv. 23, in Bibl. Polyglot. 


4] 


to believe, that he printed nothing else than a trans- 
lation out of the Latin, and that for these reasons. 

First: Because in the preface to his edition 
of the New Testament we are told, that this Tes- 
tament was printed after the manuscripts taken 
out of the Pope’s library; and these the cardinal 
only borrowed’ thence, and therefore returned 
them back so soon as his edition was finished. 
And Caryophilus some time after, by the Pope’s 
command, collating the Vatican manuscripts, 
found the testimony of ‘‘the Three in Heaven” 
wanting in them all. Ido not say but that the 
cardinal had other manuscripts; but these were 
the chief, and the only ones he thought worth 
while to tell his reader of. 

Secondly : I startle at the marginal note in this 
place of the cardinal’s edition. For it is beside 
the use of this edition, to put notes in the margin 
of the Greek text. I have not found it done above 
thrice in all this edition of the New Testament ; 
and therefore there must be something extraordi- 
nary ; and that, in respect of the Greek, because 
itis in the margin of this text. In 1 Corinth. xv. 
there is noted in this margin a notable variation 
in the Greek reading. In Matthew vi. 13, where 
they, in their edition, recede from the Greek co- 
pies, and correct it by the Latin, they make a 


1 « Accivit @ Vaticané Romz Bibliothecfé, bon cum Leo- 
nis X. pontificis maximi veni& ;’”,-—as Gasper Bellerus, in his 
epistle prefixed to the Quinquagena of Antonius Nabrissen- 
sis, expresses it, 


42 


marginal note to justify their doing so; and soe 
here, where the testimony of ‘‘ the Three in Hea- 
ven ” is generally wanting in the Greek copies, 
they make a third marginal note, to secure them- 
selves from being blamed for printing it. Now in 
such a case as this, there is no question but they 
would make the best defence they could ; and yet 
they do not tell of any various lections in the 
Greek manuscripts, nor produce any one Greek 
manuscript on their side, but run to the authority 
of Thomas Aquinas’. The Greek manuscripts 
have the text thus: ‘‘ For there are Three that 
bear record, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood ; 
and these Three are One.” In many of the Latin 
manuscripts, the words. *‘ these Three are One”’ 
are here omitted, and put only at the end of the 


1 The marginal note is this: ‘“‘ Sanctus Thomas, in ex po- 
sitione secunde decretalis de summa Trinitate et Fide Catho- 
lica, tractans istum passum contra Abbatem Joachim, viz. » 
‘Tres sunt, qui testimonium dant in ccelo, Pater, Verbum, et 
Spiritus Sanctus,’ dicit ad literam verba sequentia :—‘ Et ad 
insinuendam unitatem trium personarum subditur, et Hi Tres 
Unum sunt ;’? quandoquidem dicitur propter essentie unita- 
tem. Sed hoc Joachim perversé trahere volens ad unitatem 
charitatis et consensiis, inducebat consequentem auctoritatem. 
Nam subditur ibidem, ‘Et Tres sunt, qui testimonium dant 
in terra, Spiritus Sanctus, Aqua, et Sanguis:’ et in quibus- 
dam libris additur, ‘et hi Tres Unum sunt.’ Sed hoc in 
veris exemplaribus non habetur; sed dicitur esse appositum 
ab Hereticis Arianis ad pervertendum intellectum sanum 
auctoritatis premissz de unitate essentie Trium Personarum.” 
Hec Beatus Thomas, ubi supra. 


43 


testimony of ‘‘the Three in Heaven,” before that 
of ‘‘the Spirit, Water, and Blood :” in others they 
are put after both testimonies. In the Complu- 
tensian edition they follow the former copies, and 
justify their doing so, by the authority of Thomas 
Aquinas. ‘‘Thomas,” say they, “in treating of 
the Three which bear witness in Heaven, teaches, 
that the words ‘these Three are One’ are subjoined 
for insinuating the unity of the essence of the 
Three persons. And whereas one Joachim inter- 
preted this unity to be only in dove and consent, it 
being thus said of the Spirit, Water, and Blood, 
in some copies, ‘these Three are One’;” Thomas 
replied, ‘‘That this last clause is not extant in the 
true copies; but was added by the Arians for per- 
verting the sense.”” Thus far this annotation. 
Now this plainly respects the Latin copies (for 
Thomas understood not Greek), and therefore part 
of the design of this annotation is to set right the 
Latin reading. But this is not the main design. 
For so the annotation should have been set in the 
margin of the Latin version. Its being set in the 
margin of the Greek text, shows that its main 
design is to justify the Greek by the Latin thus 
rectified and confirmed. Now to make Thomas 
thus, in a few words, do all the work, was very 
artificial ; and in Spain, where Thomas is of apo- 
stolic authority, might pass for a very judicious 
and substantial defence of the printed Greek. But 
to us Thomas Aquinas is no Apostle. We are seek- 
ing for the authority of Greek manuscripts, 


44 


A third reason why I conceive the Compluten- 
sian Greek to have been in this place a transla- 
tion from the Latin, is, because Stunica (who as 
I told you, was one of the divines employed by 
the Cardinal in this edition, and at that very time 
wiote against Erasmus) when, in his objections, 
he comes to this text of the testimony of ‘‘ the 
Three in Heaven,” he cites not one Greek manu- 
script for it against Erasmus; but argues wholly 
from the authority of the Latin. On the contrary, 
he sets down, by way of concession, the common 
reading of the Greek mannscripts (as well as his 
own, and thatof others) in these words, ‘‘ ore 
TPELG EloLY OL fapTUpOUYTEG’ TO TvEUpA, Kal TO 
vowp, Kat TO alia’ Kat ot TpelG eg TO Ev eLoL:”” 
and then condemns them altogether without ex- 
ception ; and justifies the Latin against them by 
the authority of Jerome. ‘‘ Know,” saith he, 
““that in this place the Greek manuscripts are 
most evidently corrupted; but ours (that is, the 
Latin ones) contain the truth itself, as they are 
translated from the first original: which is ma- 
nifest by the prologue of St. Jerome upon the 
Epistles, &c.”'. And this prologue (which he 
goes on to cite at length, and of which we gave 

1 «Sciendum est, hoc loco codices apertissimé esse cor- 
ruptos; nostros verd veritatem ipsam, ut a prima origine 
traducti sunt, continere ; quod ex prologo B. Hieronymi super 
Epistolas manifesté apparet. Ait enim, ‘ Que si sicut ab eis 
digestz sunt; ita quoque ab interpretibus fideliter in Latinum 
verterentur eloquium,’” &c.—Heec Stunica tn hunc locum, 
Ejus Liber eastat in Criticor. vol, ix, 


45 


you an account above) is all he argues in favour 
of the testimony of ‘‘the Three in Heaven.” In 
other places of Scripture, where he had Greek 
manuscripts on his side, he produces them readily. 
So 1 Thessalonians it. 7, ‘‘ [ta quidem legitur,” 
says he, “‘zn Grecis codicibus quos ego viderim.” 

In James i. 11, he saith, ‘* Sctendum in omni- 
bus Grecis codicibus wopeate hic legi per a di- 
phthongum.” In 1 Thessalonians v. 23, he saith, 
‘Cumin Grecis eremplaribus quotquot sunt, oXo- 
xAnpov, et in Latinis integer hic legatur, perne- 
mine discrepante, nescio cur Erasmus dixerit,” &c. 
In Philipp. iv.9, ‘* Si guidemin omnibus,” saith he, 
*‘ Greciscodicibus, ravra Noyieo0e hic legitur ; ne- 
gue Greci sunt libri, qut rpaccere hoc loco, neque 
Latini, qui agite ; nist mendosos utriusque, lingue 
codices, cumhaccommentaretur Erasmus, perlegit.”’ 
After this manner does Stunica produce the manu- 
scripts used in the Complutensian edition, when 
they make for him; and here he produces them too, 
but it is for Erasmus against himself. ‘* Know,” 
saith he, “that in this place the Greek manu- 
scripts are most evidently corrupted.” In other 
places, if he hath but one manuscript on his side, 
he produces it magnificently enough; as the Codex 
Rhodiensis in his discourses upon 2 Corinthians 
li, 3, James i. 22, 2 Peter ii. 2, and other texts. 
Here he produces all the manuscripts against him- 
self, without excepting so much as one. And 
hence Erasmus, in his answer to Stunica, gloried 
in the consent of the Spanish manuscripts with 


46 


his own; and Sanctius Caranza, another of the 
Complutensian divines, in his defence of Stunica, 
written presently after, had nothing to reply in 
this point. Neither could Sepulveda, or the 
Spanish monks who next undertook the contro- 
versy, find one Greek manuscript, which here 
made against Erasmus. Neither had Marchio 
Valesius better success, though on that occasion 
he collated sixteen Greek manuscripts, eight 
whereof belonged to the king of Spain’s library, 
and the other eight to other libraries of Spain: 
and he did it on purpose to collect out of them 
whatever he could meet with in favour of the pre- 
sent vulgar Latin. Neither did the reprinting of 
the Complutensian Bible by Arias Montanus pro- 
duce the notice of any such manuscript ; though, 
on that occasion, many manuscripts, as well Greek 
as Latin, fetched from Complutum and other 
places, were collated by Arias, Lucas Brugensis, 
Canter, and others. 

XXX. So then, to sum up the argument, the 
Complutensian divines did sometimes correct the 
Greek by the Latin, without the authority of any 
Greek manuscript, as appears by their practice in 
Matthew vi. 13; and therefore their printing the 
testimony of “the Three in Heaven’’ is no evi- 
dence that they did it by a manuscript, but, on the 
contrary, for want of one, they contented them- 
selves with the authority of Thomas Aquinas ; 
and Stunica confessed that they had none. Nor 
has all the zeal for this text been able since 


47 


to discover one either in Spain, or anywhere 
else. 

XXXI. And now you may understand whence 
it is, that the Complutensian edition, and the 
reading of the pretended English manuscript, set 
down by Erasmus in his annotations, differ so 
much from one another ; for the Complutensian 
editisn has the text thus; “Or Tpetc etow ot 
HapTupourTes ev TY ovparyy’ 0 TaTnp, 0 » Noyos, kat 
TO a*ytoy mveUEG. Kat ot TPElG €lg TO év €tol. Kat 
TPELG Eloy ol epee POUrtes Ertl THG ye, TO TVEULA, 
Kat TO vowp, Kat TO aipa. ” The pretended English 
manuscript thus ; ‘‘ Ore rpetc evo of paptrupour- 
TEG EV TW OUPAYYW, TaTNP, ADYOE, Kat TVEUMA’ Kat 
OUTOL Ol TPELG EV ELTLY. Kat TPELG papTUPOUY TES EV 
THY), Wveupa, Kat vowp, kat aia.” The differ- 
ences are too great to spring from the bare errors 
of scribes, and arise rather from the various trans- 
lations of the place, out of Latin into Greek, by 
two several persons. 

XXXII. But whilst these two readings, by 
their discord, confute one another, the readings of 
the real Greek manuscripts by their agreement 
confirm one another as much. For Caryophilus, 
who by the command of Pope Urban the Eighth, 
collated the Vatican and other manuscripts, bor- 
rowed out of the principal libraries in Rome, 
found one common reading in them all, without 
the testimony of “‘the Three in Heaven;” as you 
may see in those his collations, printed in 1673 
by Peter Possinus, in the end of his Catena of 


A8 


the Greek Fathers upon Mark. He met with 
eight manuscripts in all upon the epistles, and 
notes their reading thus: ‘£1 Joan. v. 7, Manu- 
scripti octo (omnes nempe) legunt, ‘Ort tpete 
e€totv ot BER EY PORN eeey TO ia ait Kat ih vowp, Kat 
TO alma’ Katot TpELG eg To Ev eto.” “* Porro 
totus septimus versus hujus capitis destderatur in 
octo manuscriptis codicibus Grecis,” &c. Thus 
Caryophilus. 

XX XIII. The very same reading Erasmus, in 
his annotations on this place, gives us of all his 
manuscripts, which were more than seven; and 
so doth Stephens of all his seven, without noting 
any various lections in them. Only the comma, 
which in Stephens’s edition is, surely by mistake, 
set after ovpavy, is to be put inits right place. The 
very same reading does Stunica also, in his book 
against Erasmus, note out of the manuscript he 
had seen in Spain, as was seen above. Nor does 
Valesius, in his collection of the sixteen Spanish 
manuscripts, note any various lections in this text. 
The same reading exactly have also the manu- 
scripts in England; namely, that most ancient 
and famous one in the king’s library, which was 
conveyed thither from Egypt through Greece, and 
published in Walton’s Polyglott Bible; and the 
four at Oxford, viz. that in New College, and 
that in Magdalen College, both very old, and two 
in Lincoln College ; and four or five other ancient 
ones lately collated at Oxford, in order to a new 
impression of the Greek Testament, as I am in- 


49 


formed. The very same reading have also the 
three manuscripts of Monsieur Petavius Gachon, 
a senator of Paris, whose various lections, col- 
lected by his son John Gachon, were printed in 
the Oxford edition of the New Testament, anno 
Christi 1675. The same reading, without any 
variation, is published by Francis Asulan in his 
edition, printed anno Christi 1518, by Aldus at 
Venice, out of the manuscripts of those parts. 
The same reading Gicumenius, six hundred years 
ago, found in the manuscripts of Greece ; as you 
may see inthe text of his commentary on this 
epistle of St. John. The same reading also Cyril 
of Alexandria met with in the manuscripts of 
Egypt, above eleven hundred years ago; as you 
may see in his citations of the text; both in his 
Thesaurus, lib. xiv. cap. 5; and in his first book 
De Fide ad Reginas ; excepting that in the latter 
of these two citations the paricle ete is omitted ; 
and paprupover written for ot paprupouvrec. And 
that the very same reading was also in the manu- 
scripts of the first ages, may be gathered from 
the conformity of this reading to all the ancient 
versions. 

XXXIV. It may seem by what has been hi- 
therto said, that this testimony is not to be found 
in the Greek manuscripts. Epanorthotes', whom 


1 « Habuimus ab Hunneeo,—id quod maximi facimus, MS. 
Bibl. correctorium ab incerto auctore, quem Epanorthotem, 
aut correctorem fere vocamus, magna diligentia, ac fide con- 
textum, secuto uti oportet antiquos nostre editionis codices, 


p 


P daa fo ee Se Oe a 


50 


Lucas Brugensis describes to be an ancient, ac- 
curate, full, and industrious collator of manu- 
scripts, found it wanting in all those he met with. 
‘* Epanorthotes,” saith Lucas, ‘‘ deesse hac eadem 
Grecis libris, et antiquis Latinis annotat.” Nor 
have other collators made a further discovery to 
this day. Lee, Stunica, and the rest in England, 
Spain, Flanders, France, and Italy, who conspired 
against Erasmus, could find nothing in the manu- 
scripts of those parts against him ; if that Phoenix 
be excepted, which once appeared to somebody 
somewhere in England, but could never since be 
seen. Hesselius', about the year 1565, pro- 


eosque cum Hebreis, Grecis, et veterum patrum commen- 
tariis sedulo collatos ; qui liber ad Genesin viii. 7. latius a 
nobis descriptus est.” Hzeec Lucas; qui ad Genesin viii. 7, 
dixit hunc librum multis annis scriptum, et pluribus forté com- 
positum. Dein, loco ex eo citato, pergit. Ad que dici quid 
possit? An quod libro fidendum non sit? Non hoc dicet> 
qui evolverit; que namque a nostri seculi scriptoribus ex 
MSS. codicibus collectz sunt varie lectiones, omnes prope- 
modum in eo comperimus ; et ad fontes fideliter examinatas 
deprehendimus. Scripsit hec Lucas, anno 1579; ‘‘ unde se- 
quitur correctorium ante disputationes Erasmicas de testibus 
in ceelo elaboratum esse.” 

1 Hesselius in hunc locum ait; ‘“‘ Manuscripti Greci fere 
omnes sic se habent: ‘ Quoniam Tres sunt, qui testimonium 
dant in terra, Spiritus, Aqua, et Sanguis, et hi Tres Unum sunt;’ 
nulla facta mentione triplicis testimonii de ccelo ‘ Patris, Verbi, 
et Spirits Sancti.’ ”’? Dein codices aliter legentes describendo 
sic pergit; ‘‘ Nostro tempore duo Greci codices manuscripti 
reperti sunt ; unus in Anglia, et alter in Hispania; quorum 
uterque hoc loco testimonium habet ‘ Patris, Verbi, et Spiritds 
Sancti.’ ”’ 


51 


fessor of divinity at Lovain, in his commentary on 
this place, ingenuously confesses it wanting in 
all the Greek manuscripts then known, except 
two, the one in Spain, the other in England ; 
meaning those by which the Complutensian di- 
vines and Erasmus printed it. Which two we 
have shown to be none at all; unless one Annius 
dug upone in England. Since that time nothing 
further has been produced, besides the imaginary 
books of dreaming Beza. And yet I will not say, 
but that it may hereafter be found in some Greek 
copies. For in the times of the holy war, the 
Latines had much to do in the East. They were 
long united to the Greek church ; they made Latin 
patriarchs of Jerusalem and Antioch ; they reigned 
at Constantinople over the Greeks from the year 
1204, for above fifty years together ; arid during 
this their kingdom, in the year 1215, was assem- 
bled the Lateran council, consisting of four hun- 
dred and fifteen bishops, Greeks and Latins 
together ; and therein the testimony of “‘ the Three 
in Heaven” was quoted out of some of the Latin 
manuscripts, as we told you above. All which 
might occasion some Greeks, as well as Latins, to 
note it in the margins of their books ; and hence 
insert it into the text in transcribing. For this is 
most certain, that some Greek manuscripts have 
been corrected by the Latin ones. Such a book 
Erasmus’ tells us, that he ‘‘ once met with, and 


1 « Hic obiter illud incidit admonendum esse Gracorum 
quosdam Novi Testamenti codices ad Latina exemplaria emen- 


D2 


52 


that there was such another in the Pope’s library.” 
He suspected also that book in England, out of 
which he printed the testimony of ‘‘ the Three in 
Heaven,” to be of the same kind ; though I rather 
think it was none at all; unless some falsary of 
that age were at the pains to transcribe one or 
two of St. Paul's epistles. Such another book 
was one of those, out of which Valesius collected 
his various lections. Whence Mariana, into 
whose hands the manuscript book of those lec- 
tions fell, tells us, that for that reason, in his an- 
notations on the New Testament, he used those 
lections but sparingly and cautiously. And that 
Valesius did meet with such a corrected manu- 
script, appears by the lections themselves. For 
in the Apocalypse xvill. 17, where the Greek 
reads emt rorov; and the Latin translates in locum, 
and by the error of one letter in dacum, as the 
books now have it; some Grecian has here cor- 
rected this book by the Latin, and written eme 
Aquyny; as it is in the lections of Valesius, taken 
out of this. Again, in the Apocalypse ix. 11, 
where the Latin translation, in expounding the 
names Abaddon et Apollyon, adds, Et Latineé 


datos. Id factum est in foedere Greecorum cum Roman ec- 
clesié ; quod fcedus testatur Bulla, que dicitur Aurea; visum 
est enim et hoc ad firmandam concordiam pertinere. Et nos 
olim in hujusmodi codicem incidimus; et talis adhuc dicitur 
adservari in Bibliothecé Pontif. Verum ex his corrigere nos- 
tros est I.csbiam, ut aiunt, admovere regulam.””— Erasmus ad 
Lectcrem. Editio 5ta Novi Testamenti. 


53 


habens nomen exterminans; Valesius notes the 
reading in his Greek copy to be pwpatst exw ovo- 
pa e€repuwarve; which certainly is a translation 
of the Latin. Again, in the Apocalypse xxi. 12, 
where the Greek has ayyeAovuc, and some ancient 
Latin copies, angelos, but the far greater part of 
the Latin copies at present have angulos; Valesius, 
in his manuscript, reads ywnac. So in the Apo- 
calypse xix. 6, where the Greek is oyAov wodAov, 
the Latin, turbe magne ; and in the later copies, 
tube magne ; Valesius, in his manuscript, reads 
cadmyyoc peyadnc. In Hebrews xiii. 2, for eda- 
Gov, latuerunt; and in later copies, placuerunt, 
Valesius reads npeoav: and in 1 Peter iii. 8, 
for ro Se reXoc, in fine, and by an error in fide, 
Valesius reads ev ry met Oe. These, and such 
like instances, put the thing out of dispute. Now, 
though Valesius found not the testimony of “‘ the 
Three in Heaven” in this manuscript; and Eras- 
mus tells us, that he never saw it in any Greek ma- 
nuscript; and, by consequence, not in that cor- 
rected one which fell into his hands; yet it may 
have crept out of the Latin into some other books, 
not yet taken notice of ; and even in some manu- 
acripts, which, in other places, have not been cor- 
rected by the Latin, it may possibly have been in- 
serted by some of the Greek bishops of the Late- 
ran council, where the testimony of ‘‘ the Three in 
Heaven” was read. And therefore he that shall 
hereafter meet with it in any book, ought first, be- 
fore he insist upon the authority of that book, to 


54 


examine whether it has not been corrected by the 
Latin; and whether it be ancienter than the La- 
teran council, and empire of the Latins in Greece ; 
for if it be liable to either of these two exceptions, 
it can signify nothing to produce it. 

XXXV. Having given you the history of the 
controversy, I shall now confirm all that I have 
said from the sense of the text itself. For, with- 
out the testimony of “‘ the Three in Heaven,” the 
sense is good and easy, as you may see by the 
following paraphrase inserted in the text in a dif- 
ferent character. 

*.'W HO IS HE THAT OVERCOMETH THE WORLD, 
BUT HE THAT BELIEVETH THAT JESUS Is THE 
SON or GOD? that Son spoken of in the Psalms, 
where he saith, ‘ Thou art my Son; this day have 
I begotten thee.’ Tunis 1s HE THAT, after the 
Jews had long expected him, camg, first in a 
mortal body By baptism of WATER, AND then in 
an immortal one by shedding his BLoopD upon 
the cross, and rising again from the dead; NoT 
BY WATER ONLY, BUT BY WATER AND BLOOD; 
being the Son of God, as well by his resurrection 
from the dead (Acts xiii, 33.), as by his superna- 
tural birth of the Virgin (Luke 1. 35.). AND IT IS 
THE SpiRiT also, THAT, together with the water 
and blood, BEARETH wIiTNEss Of the truth of his 
coming; BECAUSE THE SPIRIT Is TRUTH; and 
so a fit and unexceptionable witness, For THERE 
ARE THREE THAT BEAR RECORD of his coming ; 
THE Spirit, which he promised to send, and 


55 


which was since shed forth upon us in the form 
of cloven tongues, and in various gifts; THE 
baptism of waTeER, wherein God testified, ‘ This 
is my beloved Son;’ anp THE shedding of his 
BLOOD, accompanied with his resurrection, where- 
by he became the most faithful martyr or witness 
of this truth, ANp THESE THREE, the spirit, the 
baptism, and passion of Christ, AGREE IN wit- 
nessing ONE and the same thing, namely, that 
the Son of God is come; and, therefore, their 
evidence is strong: for the law requires but two 
consenting witnesses, and here we have three. 
AND IF WE RECEIVE THE WITNESS OF MEN, THE 
threefold witness or GOD, which he bare of his 
Son, by declaring at his baptism, ‘This is my 
beloved Son ;’ by raising him from the dead, and 
by pouring out his spirit on us, 18s GREATER ; and 
therefore ought to be more readily received.” 
XXXVI. Thus is the sense plain and natural, 
and the argument full and strong; but if you in- 
sert the testimony of ‘‘ the Three in Heaven,” you 
interrupt and spoil it. For the whole design of 
the apostle being here to prove to men by wit- 
ness the truth of Christ’s coming, I would ask 
how the testimony of “the Three in Heaven” 
makes to this purpose. If their testimony be 
not given to men, how does it prove to them the 
truth of Christ’s coming? If it be, how is the 
testimony in heaven distinguished from that on 
earth? It is the same spirit which witnesses in 
heaven and in earth. Ifin both cases it witnesses 


56 


to us men, wherein lies the difference between 
its witnessing in heaven, and its witnessing in 
earth? _If, in the first case, it does not witness 
to men, to whom does it witness? And to what 
purpose? And how does its witnessing make to 
the design of St. John’s discourse? Let them 
make gvod sense of it who are able. For my 
part, I can make none. If it be said that we are 
not to determine what is Scripture, and what not, 
by our private judgements ; I confess it in places, 
not controverted ; but indisputable places, I love 
to take up with what I can best understand. It 
is the temper of the hot and superstitious part of 
mankind, in matters of religion, ever to be fond 
of mysteries ; and for that reason, to like best 
what they understand least. Such men may use 
the apostle John as they please; but I have that 
honour for him, as to believe that he wrote good 
sense; and therefore take that sense to be his, 
which is the best ; especially since I am defended 
in it by so great authority. For I have on my 
side the authority of the Fourth General Council, 
and, so far as I know, of all the churches in all 
ages, except the modern Latin, and such others 
as have lately been influenced by them; and that 
also of all the old versions, and Greek manuscripts, 
and ancient Latin ones; and nothing against me, 
but the authority of Jerome, and the credulity 
and heat of his followers. 

For to tell us of other manuscripts, without 
ever letting us know in what libraries they were 


o¢ 


to be seen; to pretend manuscripts, which, since 
their first discovery, could never be heard of ; nor 
were then seen by persons whose names and 
credit we know; is plainly to impose upon the 
learned world, and ought not to pass any longer 
for plain dealing. The Spaniards tell us plainly 
that they followed the Latin, and by the authority 
of Thomas left out the clause, ‘‘ And these Three 
are One,” in the eighth verse, as inserted by the 
Arians. And yet St. Ambrose, St. Austin, Eu- 
cherius, and other Latins, in the Arian age, 
gathered the unity of the Deity from this clause ; 
and the omission of it is now, by printing it, ac- 
knowledged to be an erroneous correction. The 
manuscript in England wanted the same clause, 
and therefore, if there was any such manuscript, 
it was a corrected one, like the Spanish edition, 
and the manuscript of Valesius. Erasmus, who 
printed the triple testimony in heaven by that 
English manuscript, never saw it; tells us it was 
a new one; suspected its sincerity ; and accused 
it publicly in his writings on several occasions, 
for several years together ; and yet his adversaries 
in England never answered his accusation; never 
endeavoured to satisfy him and the world about 
it; did not so much as let us know where the 
record might be consulted for confuting him ; 
but, on the contrary, when they had got the 
Trinity into his edition, threw by their manu- 
script, if they had one, as an almanac out of date. 
And can such shuffling dealings satisfy consider- 
do 


58 


ing men? Let manuscripts at length be produced, 
and freely exposed to the sight of the learned 
world ; but let such manuscripts be produced as 
are of authority ; or else let it be confessed, that 
whilst Jerome pretended to correct the Latin by 
the Greek, the Latins have corrected both the 


Latin and the Greek by the sole authority of 
Jerome. 


I. Wuat the Latins have done to this text 
the Greeks have done to that of St. Paul, 1 Ti- 
mothy iii. 16. For by changing o into GC, the 
abbreviation of Qeoc, they now read, ‘‘ Great is 
the mystery of godliness; GOD manifested in 
the Hesh.”” Whereas all the churches for the first 
four or five hundred years, and the authors of all 
the ancient versions, Jerome, as well as the rest, 
read, ‘‘ Great is the mystery of godliness, which 
was manifested in the flesh.” For this is the 
common reading of the Ethiopic, Syriac, and 
Latin versions to this day; Jerome’s manuscripts 
having given him no occasiqn to correct the old 
~ vulgar Latin in this place. Grotius adds the 
Arabic, but the Egyptian Arabic version has Qeoe, 
and so has the above-mentioned Sclavonian ver- 
sion of Cyrillus; for these two versions were 
made long after the sixth century, wherein the 


59 


corruption began. With the ancienter versions 
agree the writers of the first five centuries, both. 
Greeks and Latins. For they, in all their dis- 
courses to prove the Deity of the Son, never allege 
this text, that I can find, as they would all have 
done, and some of them frequently, had they read 
‘God manifested in the flesh;” and therefore 
they read o. Tertullian adversus Praxeam, and 
Cyprian adversus Judaos, industriously cite all 
the places where Christ is called God, but have 
nothing of this. Alexander of Alexandria, Atha- 
nasius, the bishops of the council of Sardica, 
Epiphanius, Basil, Gregory Nazianzen, Gregory 
Nyssen, Chrysostom, Cyril of Jerusalem, Cyril of 
Alexandria, Cassian, also Hilary, Lucifer, Jerome, 
Ambrose, Austin, Phebadius, Victorinus Afer, 
Faustinus Diaconus, Pope Leothe Great, Arnobius 
junior, Cerealis, Vigilius Tapsensis, Fulgentius, 
wrote all of them in the fourth and fifth centuries, 
for the Deity of the Son, and incarnation of God ; 
and some of them largely, and in several tracts ; 
and yet I cannot find that they ever allege this 
text to prove it, excepting that Gregory Nyssen’ 
once urges it, if the passage crept not into him 
out of some marginal annotation. In all the times 
of the hot and lasting Arian controversy, it never 
came into play; though, now those disputes are 
over, they that read ‘‘ God manifested in the 
flesh,” think it one of the most obvious and per- 
tinent texts for the business. 


1 Orat. xi. contra Eunom. 


60 


II. The churches, therefore, of those ages were 
absolute strangers to this reading. For, on the 
contrary, their writers, as often as they have any 
occasion to cite the reading then in use, discover 
thatit waso. For though they cite it not to prove 
the Deity of the Son, yet in their commentaries, 
and sometimes in other discourses, they produce 
it. And particularly Hilary (lib. 2. de Trinttate) 
and Ambrose, or whoever of his contemporaries 
was the author of the commentary on the epistles, 
reads 0; and so doth St. Austin in Genesin ad li- 
terum, lib. 6: and Beda in his commentary on 
this text, where he cites the reading of St. Austin, 
and the author of the commentary on the epistles, 
ascribed to Jerome. So also do Primasius and 
Sedulius in their commentaries on this text; 
and Victorinus Afer, lib. 1. adversus Arium; and 
Idacius Clarus, or rather Vigilius Tapsensis, lib. 3. 
adversus Varimadum, cap. 12; and Fulgentius, 
c. 2. de Incarnatione ; and so did Pope Leo the 
Great, epist. 20. ad Flavianum; and Pope Gregory 
the Great, lib. 34, Moral. cap. 7. These ancient 
Latins all cite the text after this manner, ‘‘ Great 
is the mystery of godliness, which was manifested 
in the flesh ;” as the Latin manuscripts of St. Paul’s 
epistles generally have it to this day ; and there- 
fore it cannot be doubted, but that this hath been 
the constant public reading of the Latin churches 
from the beginning. So also one of the Arians 
in a homily, printed in Fulgentius’s works, reads 
o, and interprets it of the Son of God, who was 


61 


born of the Father ante secula ; and of the Virgin, 
tn novissimo tempore. And Fulgentius, in his an- 
swer to this homily, found no fault with the ci- 
tation ; but, on the contrary, in his first book ad 
Trasimundum, cap. 6, seems to have read and un- 
derstood the text after the same manner with 
other Latins. 

III. Now for the Greeks: [ find indeed that 
they have changed the ancient reading of the text, 
not only in the manuscripts of St Paul’s epistles, 
but also in other authors ; and yet there are still 
remaining sufficient instances among them of 
what the reading was at first. Soin Chrysostom’s 
commentary on this epistle, they have now gotten 
Oeoc into the text; and yet by considering the 
commentary itself, I am satisfied that he read o. 
For he neither in this commentary, nor anywhere 
else, infers the Deity of Christ from this text ; 
nor expounds it as they do who read Qeog* ; but, 


* Nor expounds it as they do who read @eo¢.] They who 
read Qzo¢ cannot expound the passage otherwise than Chrysostom 
expounds it. His words, “‘ For God was made Man, and Man 
God,” are not particularly expositive of ¢, as our author ima- 
gines, but declarative of the mystery which the apostle calls the 
great mystery of godliness, and they will not decide for either 
reading. ‘‘ Observe,’’ says Chrysostom, ‘‘ how the apostle calls 
the dispensation for our sakes (the scheme of redemption] a my- 
stery in all tts branches. With good reason. For it is not known 
toallmen. Nay, rather it was [formerly] not known to angels. 
How should it? since it has been discovered through the church. 
Therefore, he says, without controversy it is great. And great 
indeed it is. For God has been made Man, and Man God. A 


62 


with the Latins, who read o, understands by it 
Christ incarnate ; or, as he expresses it, ‘‘ Man 
made God, and God made man;” and 50 leaves it 
at liberty to be taken for either God or man. 
And accordingly in one place of his commentary 
he saith, ‘‘ EdavepwOn ev capxi o Snptoupyoc*.” 
In another place; “ AvOpwroc wPOn avanaprn- 
TOC, avOpwiroc avahnpon, exnpuxOn EV KOCLY, pel’ 
Tv esov avrov ot ayyeAo.”  ‘* Man appeared 
without sin; Man was received up; Man was 
preached. in the world ; _was seen amongst us by 
angels.” Instead of “6 eavepwOn ev capkt, edt- 
kawwOn ev mvevpatt,” &c. he saith, ‘* Man appear- 
ed without sin ;” making Man the nominative case 
to these, and all the verbs which follow; which 
certainly he would not have done, had Qeog been 
their nominative case expressly in the text. He 


Man was seen without sin. .A Man has been received up— 
preached in the world—angels saw him with us — truly this is my- 
stery.” The design of this paraphrase of St. Chryscstom’s is to 
show that the scheme of redemption involves mystery in every 
distinct branch mentioned by the apostle ; and our author’s con- 
clusion, that the subject of the verb eQaveouby, in Chrysostom’s 
Bible was something that might be taken either for God or man, 
is at best precarious. The more natural conclusion would be, that 
the common subject of the verbs epaveoadn, sdsxcesan, wPbn, exn- 
evx dn, &c. was some word that might denote a living person ; and 
is not likely to have been the neuter relative ¢.—Bp. Horsley. | 

* Chrysostom’s words are—acyuy, “‘ @co¢ sPaveown ev cae- 
xi,” rovresiv, 6 Ongesovgyos. Substitute 6 for Osos in the text 
of Chrysostom, and the exposition rovr’ egiv 6 dnusoveyos, will 
be rank nonsense.—Bp. Horsley. 


63 


might properly put man for o, but not for Oeoe. 
Neithercould he have putavapaprnroc for edixatwOn, 
if he had read in his text Qeoe cdtkatwOn. For what 
man of common sense would say, that God was 
made sinless in and through the spirit?) But what 
I have said of Chrysostom will be more evident, 
when I shall have shown you how afterwards, in 
the time of the Nestorian controversy, all parties 
read o or oc, without any dispute raised about 
the reading ; and how the Greeks have since cor- 
rupted the text in Cyril’s writings, and changed 
o and o¢ into Qeoc, as they have done in Chry- 
sostom’s. 

IV. And, first, that the Nestorians read o is 
evident by some fragments of the orations or 
homilies of Nestorius, sent by him to the Pope, 
and cited by Arnobius junior, in the second book 
of his conflict with Serapion. For there, in order 
to show what was the opinion of Nestorius, and 
how he defended it, he cites two of his orations 
in these words; ‘‘ Non peperit sanctizsima Maria 
Deitatem; nam quod natum est de carne, caro est. 
Non peperit creatura Creatorem; sed peperit ho- 
minem Deitatis ministrum. Non edificavit Deum 
verbum Spiritus Sanctus ; quod ex ipsd natum est, 
de Spiritu Sancto est. Deo itaque virgo templum 
ex virgine adificavit.” Et paulo post; “ Qui 
per se natus est Deus in utero (scilicet ante Lu- 
ciphorum) Deus est.” Et paulo post; ‘‘ Qeo- 
roxov formam in Deo honoramus.” Et in alia pre- 
dicatione ; ‘‘ Spiritum divina separat natura, qui 


64 


humanitatem ejus creavit. Quicquid ex Marid 
natum est, de Spiritu Sancto est, qui et secundum 
justitiam replevit, quod creatum est ; hoc quod ma- 
nifestum est in carne, justificatum est in Spiritu.”’ 
Which last words in the language wherein Nesto- 
rius wrote those homilies, are, ‘‘o epavepwOn ev 
capkt, edtkatwOn ev mvevpart.” 

V. Here you see that Nestorius reads o ex- 
pressly : not only so, but absolutely excludes 
God from being understood by it; arguing, that 
the Virgin was not Qeoroxoc, because that thing 
which was manifested in the flesh, was justified 
in the spirit; or, as he expounds it, replenished 
by the spirit in righteousness, and calling that 
thing which was manifested in the flesh, a crea- 
ture; ‘‘ Spiritus,” saith he, ‘‘ secundum justitiam 
replevit [hoc] quod creatum est ; [nempe] hoc 
quod manifest est in carne, justificatum est in 
Spiritu.” 

VI. And now, whilst he read the text after 
this manner, and urged it thus against the Deity 
of Christ, one would suspect, that if this had not 
been the received public reading in the Greek 
churches, his adversaries would have fallen foul 
upon him, and exclaimed against him for falsify- 
ing the text, and blasphemously saying it was a 
created thing, which the Scripture calls ‘‘ God 
manifested in the flesh.’”?’ And such an accu- 
sation as this would surely have made as great 
a noise us anything else in the controversy ; and 
yet I meet with nothing of this kind in history. 


65 


His adversaries do not so much as tell him that 
OQeoc was in the text. They were so far from 
raising any controversy about the reading, that 
they do not in the least correct him for it; but 
on thecontrary, they themselves, in their answers 
to his writings, read o as he did; and only la- 
boured by various disputations to put another 
sense upon the text, as I find by Cassian and 
Cyril, the two principal who at that time wrote 
against him. 

VII. John Cassian was Chrysostom’s scholar, 
and his deacon and legate to the Pope; and af- 
ter the banishment of Chrysostom, retired from 
Constantinople into Syria and Egypt, where he 
lived a monkish hfe for some time, and then 
ended his days in France. At that time, there- 
fore, when Nestorius, who was patriarch of Con- 
atantinople, broached his opinion, and Cyril, the 
patriarch of Alexandria, opposed him; Nestorius 
sent a legacy to Rome with copies of his orations, 
to let the Pope understand the controversy: and 
thereupon Leo the Great, who was then archdeacon 
of the Church of Rome, and afterwards Pope, 
put Cassian (then in. France) upon writing this 
book, De Incarnatione Domini, against Nesto- 
rius.. . He wrote it therefore in the year 430, as 
Baronius also reckons. For he wrote it before 
the condemnation of Nestorius in the council of 
Ephesus, as appears by the book itself. This 
book is now extant only in Latin; but, consider- 
ing that his design in writing was to stir up the 


66 


Greek church against Nestorius, and that for the 
making great impression upon them, he quotes 
Greek fathers at the end of his book, and con- 
cludes with an exhortation to the citizens of Con- 
stantinople, telling them, that what he wrote for, 
he had received from his master Chrysostom ; I 
am satisfied that he wrote it originally in Greek : 
his other books were in both languages. For 
Photius saw them in eloquent Greek ; and it is 
more likely that they had their author’s eloquent 
language from their author, and the Latin from 
one of the Latins where he lived, than that the 
contrary should be true. Now in this treatise’, 
when he comes to consider the passage of Nesto- 
rius about this text, of which we gave you an 
account above out of Arnobius, he returns this 
answer to it; ‘‘ Jam primum enim hoc ais, Nes- 
tori, quia justitia repleverit, quod creatum est ; 
et hoc apostolico vis testimonio comprobare, quod 
dicat, apparuit in carne; justificatus est in 
Spiritu; utrumque falso sensu et furioso sptritu 
loqueris. Quia et hoc, quod a Spiritu vis eum 
repletum esse justitid, ideo ponis, ut ostendas ejus 
vacuilatem, cui prestitam esse asseras Justitia 
adimpletionem. Et hoc, quod super hdc re apo- 
stolico testimonio uteris, divini testtmoniu ordinem 
rattonemque furaris. Non enim ita ab apostolo 
positum est, ut tu id truncatum vitiatumque po- 
suistt. Quid enim apostolus ait? ‘ Et manifesté 
magnum est pietatis sacramentum, quod manifes- 


1 Libro septimo, cap. 18. 


67 


tum est in carne, justificatum est in Spiritu.’ 
Vides ergo, quod mysterium pvetatis, vel sacra- 
mentum justificatum apostolus predicavit.”” Thus 
far Cassian not only reading o, but confuting 
Nestorius by that reading. For whereas Nes- 
torius said it was a creature which was justified, 
Cassian tells him, that if he had read the whole 
text, he would have found that it was “ the 
mystery of godliness.” ‘* Vides ergo,” saith he, 
“* quod mysterium pietatis justificatum apostolus 
| predicavit.” He does not say, ‘* Deum justtfi- 
catum apostolus predicavit ” (as he would cer- 
tainly have done, had that been in his Bible), but 
mystertum ; and so makes mystertum, or, which 
is all one, its relative guod, the nominative case 
to the verbs which follow. In another part of 
this treatise, lib. 5, cap. 12, Cassian cites and 
interprets the text as follows; ‘‘ Et manifeste 
magnum est ptetatis sacramentum, quod manifes- 
tatum est in carne, &c. Quod ergu magnum est 
illud sacramentum, quod manifestatum est in carne? 
Deus scritcet natusin carne, Deus visus in corpore, 
gui utique sicut palam est assumptus in glorid.”’ 
So you see Nestorius and Cassian agree in read- 
ing o, but differ in interpreting it; the one re- 
straining it to a creature, by reason of its being 
justified; the other restraining it to God, by 
_ reason of its being a great mystery, and assumed 
in glory. 

VIII. In like manner, Cyril, the grand adver- 
sary of Nestorius, in his three books De Fide ad 


68 


Imperatorem et Reginas, written against him in 
the beginning of that controversy, did not repre 

hend him, as if he had cited the text falsely, 
but only complained of his misinterpreting it; 
telling him, that he did not understand the great 
mystery of godliness, and that it was not a created 
thing, as he thought, but the Word or Son of 
God; and arguing for this interpretation from 
the circumstances of the text. And, first, in his 
book De Fide ad Imnperatorem, sect. 7, he has this 
passage ; “ [IAavaoe, un ecdores tac ypaduc’ pnre 
fev TO peya TNG evocBerag pusnpiov, rouvrest Xpi- 
Sov, 0c ethavepwOn ev capxt, edtkatwOn ev mvevpa- 
tt,” S&c. “Ye err,’ saith he, “ not knowing the 
Scriptures, nor the great mystery of gcedliness, 
that is Christ; who was manifested in the flesh, 
justified in the spirit.” By this citation it is plain 
that he read oc, using one of these manuscripts 
which,” by understanding Xprsov for pusnprov, 
turned o into oc; and, by way of interpretation, 
inserting tourest Xptcov, which in those manu- 
scripts was to be understood ; unless you will say 
that he turns Qeoc¢ into oc, which is very hard. 
For had Qeoc been in this text, he would not have 
said pusnptov, TouTest Xpicov, OG ed~avepwOn ; but 
pusnptov, Oeoc, rourect Xpisoc, ehavepwAn, put- 
ting Xpisoc, not for wusnptov, but for Oeoc. . For 
Xpisoc and Qeoc are more plainly equipollent than 
Xptsoc and pusnptov. And making Xprso¢ and 
pusnptov equipollent, he makes pusnptoy the nomi- 
native case to epavepwOn ; and therefore read them 


69 


joined in this text by the article oc. Had he read 
Ococ, he would never have left out that authentic 
and demonstrative word, and by way of interpreta- 
tion for pusnptoyv Oeoe written Xprsov oc. For 
this was not to argue against -Nestorius, but to 
spoil the argument which lay before him. Neither 
would he have gone on, as he does, within a few 
lines, to recite the same text, putting Aoyoc by way 
of interpretation for pusnproy; and after to pro- 
pound it as his bare opinion, that the Word or 
Son of God was here to be understood by this my- 
stery, and to dispute for this his opinion, as 
needing proof out of other texts of Scripture, as 
he does after this manner’: ‘ Moreover,” saith 
he, ‘fin my opinion, that mystery of godliness 
is nothing else than he who came to us from 
God the Father; the Word, who was mani- 
fested in the flesh. For in taking the form of 
a servant, he was born of the holy God-bearing 
Virgin,” &c. And then, after many other things, 
he at length in sect. 23 and 24, concludes, that 
‘‘ this divine mystery is above our understanding ; 
and that the only-begotten, who is God, and, ac- 
cording to the Scriptures, the Lord of all things, 
appeared to us, was seen on earth, and became 
man.” This he makes not the text itself, but the 
interpretation thereof; and from the preceding dis- 
pun concludes it to be genuine. 

“« Ein yore ay ovy stegoy ospecs Ts TO Ts eves Betas veTnetoy, 
n autos Nuly 0 &x% Oeov warpos Aoyos, os sDaveowdn ev coer. 
Veyeuntas yao Ose tas cytes wapbevoy xcs Oeotoxov, poetry 
Sovrcy racy.” Cyrtl. de Fide ad Imperatorem, Sect. 8. 


70 


IX. Again, in the first of his. two treatises, De 
Fide ad Reginas, near the end, he cites the text, 
and argues thus against the interpretation of Nes- 
torius. ‘‘ Who is he,” saith he, ‘‘ that is mani- 
fested in the flesh? Is it not fully evident, that 
it is no other than the Word of God the Father ? 
For so will-that be a great mystery of godliness 
(which was’ manifested in the flesh); he was 
seen of angels, ascending into heaven; he was 
preached to the Gentiles by the holy apostles ; 
he was believed on in the world, but this not as 
a mere man; but as God born in the flesh, and 
after our manner.” 

X. So also in his second book, De fide ad Re- 
ginas”, he cites the place again ; and then argues 
upon it against the opinion of Nestorius after this 
manner: ‘‘ Ifthe Word, being God, is said to be- 
come a man, and yet continue what he was before, 
without losing his Deity, the mystery of godliness 
is without doubt a very great one; but if Christ 
be a metre man, joined with God only in the parity 
of dignity and power (for this is maintained by 
some unlearned men), how is he manifested in 
the flesh? Is it not plain, that every man is in 
the flesh, and cannot otherwise be seen by any 
body ? how then was he said to be seen of the holy 
angels? For do they not also see us?) What was 
there therefore new or extraordinary in Christ, if 
the angels saw him such a man as we are, and 


1 Codex Grecus hoc loco jam legit @©C pro és sensu pertur- 
bato. 2 Sect. 33. 


71 


nothing more,” &c. Thus Cyril goes on to give 
his reasons why that which was manifested in the 
flesh, was not a mere created Man, as Nestorius 
interpreted, but the eternal Word, or Son of God ; 
all which would have been very superfluous and 
impertinent, if God had then been expressly in 
the text. 

XI. Seeing therefore Nestorius alleged the text 
to prove, that it was a created thing which was 
manifested in the flesh; and Cyril, in confuting 
him, did not answer that it was God expressly in 
the text, nor raise any debate about the reading, 
qut only put another interpretation upon the text 
than Nestorius had done; arguing with Cassian, 
that in the text it was not a mere man, as Nesto- 
rius contended, but.a great mystery of godliness ; 
and by consequence Christ, or God the Son, 
which was manifested in the flesh ; and labouring 
by divers other arguments to prove this interpre- 
tation; it is evident beyond all cavil, that Cyril 
was a stranger to Qeoc, now got into the text; and 
read oc or o, as Nestorius and Cassian did. 

XII. And all this is further confirmed by Pho- 
tius, who, in his commentary on the epistles not 
yet published, relates that Cyril, in the 12th chap- 
ter of his Scholiums, read ‘‘o¢ efavepwOn,” &c. ; 
and consonant to this reading is Cyril’s commen- 
tary upon the text in his explanation of the second 
of the twelve Anathematisms, where he puts the 
question, “‘ Quid est igttur quod dicit, apparuit 
in carne?” And explains it by saying, *‘ Hoc est, 


72 

Dei patris verbum caro factum est ;” and con- 
cludes, that it is hence that we call him God and 
Man. Whereas had Qcoc¢ been in the text, it 
would have needed no interpretation ; nor would 
he have put Aoyoe for Qeue, in order to prove that 
God was manifested in the flesh. And yet in his 
books ad Reginas, and his other writings, 
wherever he quotes this text, the Greeks have 
since corrected it by their corrected manuscripts 
of St. Paul’s epistles, and written Qeog instead 
of o; whence, if you would truly understand the 
Nestorian history, you must read o or o¢ for Qeoc¢ 
in all Cyril’s citations of this text. 

XIII. Now, whilst Cyril read o or oc, and in 
the explanation of the twelve chapters, or articles, 
quoted this text in the second article; and this 
explanation was recited by him in the council of 
Ephesus, and approved by the council’, with an 
anathema at the end of every article ; it is ma- 
nifest that this council allowed the reading oc or 
o; and by consequence that o¢ or o was the au- 
thentic, public, uncontroverted reading till after 
the times of this council. For if Nestorius and 
Cyril, the patriarchs of Constantinople and Alex- 
andria, and the heads of the two parties in this 
controversy, read oc or 0; and their writings 
went about amongst the Eastern churches, and 
were canvassed by the bishops and clergy without 
any dispute raised about the reading ; and if Cy- 
ril read o¢ by the approbation of the council itself ; 


1 Council. Ephes. par. iii. sub initio. 


73 


I think that the conclusion we make of its be- 
ing then the general uncontroverted reading must 
needs be granted us. And if the authority of one 
of the four first general councils make anything 
for the truth of the reading, we have that into the 
bargain. 

XIV. Yet whilst the Nestorian controversy 
brought the text into play, and the two parties 
ran the interpretation into extremes, the one dis- 
puting that o or o¢ was a creature, the other that 
it was the Word of God; the prevalence of the 
latter party made it pass for the orthodox opinion, 
that o or oc was God; and so gave occasion to 
the Greeks henceforward to change the language 
of Christ into that of God; and say, in their ex- 
positions of the text, that God was manifested in 
the flesh (as I find Theodoret doth), and at length 
to write God in the text itself; the easy change 
of O or OC into CEC, inviting them to do it; and, 
if this was become the orthodox authentic read- 
ing, to set right the text in Chrysostom, Cyril, 
Theodoret, and wherever else they found it (in 
their opinion), corrupted by heretics. 

XV. And the man that first began thus to alter 
the sacred text, was Macedonius, the patriarch of 
Constantinople, in the beginning of the sixth | 
century ; for the Emperor Anastasius banished 
him for corrupting it. At that time the Greek 
church had been long divided about the council 
of Chalcedon. Many who allowed the condem- 
nation of Eutyches, rejected the council; by 

E 


Ny 


74 


"eason of its decreeing, by the influence of the 
bishop of Rome's letter against Eutyches, that 
Christ subsisted not only er duabus naturis, which 
Eutyches allowed, but also tn duabus naturis ; 
which language was new to the Greeks, and by a 
great part of that church taken for Nestorianism. 
For they understood, that as the body and soul 
made the nature of Man, so God and Man made 
the nature of Christ ; assigning the nature to the 
person of Christ, as well as to all other things, 
and not considering that in all compounds the 
several parts have also their several natures. 
Hence each party endeavoured to render the other 
suspected of heresy ; as if they that were for the 
council secretly favoured the Nestorians, and they 
that were against it the Eutychians. For one 
part, in maintaining two distinct natures in Christ, 
were thought to deny the nature of one person 
with Nestorius ; and the other party, in opposing 
two distinct natures in him, were thought to deny 
the truth of one of the natures with Eutyches. 
Both parties, therefore, to clear themselves of 
those imputations, anathematized both those he- 
resies ; and therefore, whilst they thus differed in 
their modes of speaking, they agreed in their 
sense, as Evagrius well observes. But the bishops 
of Rome and Alexandria being engaged against 
one another, and for a long time distracting the 
East by these disputes; at length the Emperor 
Zeno, to quiet his empire, and perhaps to secure it 
from the encroachment of the bishopof Rome, who, 


75 


by this verbal contest’, aspired to the name and 
authority of universal bishop, sent about an he- 
noticum, or pacificatory decree ; wherein he ana- 
thematized both Nestorius and Eutyches with 
their followers on the one hand, and abrogated 
the Pope’s letter and the council on the other; 
and his successor, Anastasius, for the same end, 
laboured for to have this decree signed by all the 
bishops. And Macedonius at first subscribed 
it; but afterwards heading those who stood up 
for the council*, was, for corrupting the Scrip- 
tures in favour of his opinion, and such other 
things as were laid to his charge, deposed and 
banished, ann. C. 512°. But his own party, 
which at length prevailed, defended him, as if op- 
pressed by calumnies ; and so received that read- 
ing for genuine, which he had put about among 
them. For how ready are all parties to receive 
what they reckon on their side, Jerome well knew, 
when he recommended the testimony of “the 
Three in Heaven” by its usefulness ; and we have 
a notable instance of it in the last age, when the 
churches, both Eastern and Western, received 
this testimony in a moment in their Greek Testa- 
ments, and still continue with great zeal and pas- 

' Vide Baronium, anno 451; sect. 149, 150, 151. 

2 Evagrius, lib. iii. cap. xxi. 44.—Theodorus lector, lib. ii- 
and Marcellini Chronicon. 

8 Flavian was banished in the year of Antioch 561, as Eva- 


grius notes ; and Macedonius was banished the same year, or 
the year before’ 


E 2 


76 


sion to defend it for the ancient reading, against 
the authority of all the Greek manuscripts. 
XVI. But now I have told you the original of 
the corruption, I must tell you my author; and 
he is Liberatus, archdeacon of the church of Car- 
thage, who lived in that very age. _‘ For in his 
Breviary, which he wrote in the year 535, or soon 
after, and collected, as he saith in his preface, 
out of Greek records, he delivers it inthese words’ : 
‘** Hoc tempore Macedonius Constantinopolitanus 
episcopus ab imperatore Anastasio dicitur expulsus, 
tanqguam evangelia falsaret ; et maxime illud 
apostols dictum, Quia apparuit in carne, justifica- 
tum in spiritu. Hunc enim mutasse, ubi habet 
qui.... hoc est... . monosyllabum Grecum, li- 
terd mutatd in .... vertisse et fecisse....id est, 
ut esset Deus, apparuit per carnem. Tangquam 
Nestorianus ergo culpatus expellitur per severum 
Monachum’*.” The Greek letters here omitted are, 
in the second edition of Sunius, and in those of 
the councils, thus inserted: ‘*‘ Ubi habet oc, hoc 
est qui, monosyllabum Grecum, literd mutatd o in 
w, vertisse et fecisse we; id est, ut esset, Deus ap- 
paruit per carnem.”’ But this interpolation was 
surely made by conjecture ; for if Oeoc was in the 
sacred text before the corruption, then o¢ or o was 
not in, and so could not be changed into we: but 
if cog was not in, it could not be brought in by 
this change. The interpolation therefore is in- 


1 Liberati Brev. cap. xix. 
2 Vide Baronii Annal. 510. sect. 9. 


77 


consistent and spurious, and seems to have been 
occasioned by straining to make out Nestorianism 
here; the scribes, for that end’, referring the 
words ut esset to the sacred text ; and then the in- 
terpolator writing we for ut. Whereas they should 
have referred ut esset to the words of Liberatus, 
thus distinguished from the sacred text; ‘‘ Id est, 
ut esset, Deus apparuit per carnem.” I had rather, 
therefore, waive the conjecture of this interpolator, 
and fill up the /acune by the authority of an an- 
cient author, Hincmarus; who above eight hun- 
dred years ago” related the fact out of Liberatus 
after this manner: ‘‘ Quidam ipsas Scripturas 
verbis illicitis imposturaverunt ; sicut Macedonius 
Constantinopolitanus episcopus, qui ab Anastasio 
Imperatore ideo a civitatée expulsus legitur, quo- 
niam falsavit evangelia; et illum apostoli locum, 
quod apparuit in carne, justificatum est in spiritus 
per cognationem Grecarum literarum © et © hoc 
modo mutando falsavit. Ubi entm habuit, qui, hoc 
est OC, monosyllabum Grecum, literd mutatd O in 
©, mutavit, et fecit OC, td est, ut esset, Deus ap- 
parutt per carnem; quapropter tanquam Nestori- 


1'N.B. In Hincmari opusc. xxxiii. cap. 22. the words ut 
esset are in like manner referred to the sacred text ; and some- 
body, to make out the sense, has in their stead added ut ap- 
pareret to the words of Liberatus, and written ué appareret, ué 
esset Deus, &c. But the words ut appareret not being in Li_ 
beratus, must be struck out, and supplied bysetting the comma 
after ut esset, to part these words from the sacred text. 

* Hinemari opusce. artic. xxxiii. cap. 18. 


78 


unus fuit erpulsus.” He was banished therefore 
for changing the ancient reading (which in some 
manuscripts was OC, as these authors have it, and 
in others O) into eC. But whereas he is here re- 
presented a Nestorian for doing this, the meaning 
is, that he was banished for corrupting the text in 
favour of the doctrine of two natures in Christ ; 
which his enemies accounted Nestorianism, though 
it was not really so. Nestorius held only a human 
nature in Christ ; and that God, the Word, dwelt 
in this nature, as the spirit in a holy man; and 
therefore interpreted o of the human nature. This 
doctrine Macedonius anathematized, and main- 
tained two natures in Christ ; and, for proving 
this, corrupted the text, and made it God mani- 
fested in the flesh. This distinguishing Christ 
into two natures was, by the enemies of Mace- 
donius, accounted Nestorianism in another lan- 
guage ; and in this respect the historian saith, that 
they banished him as a Nestorian for corrupting 
the text, though he was not really of that opinion. 

XVII. But whilst he is said to be banished as 
a Nestorian for this, without explaining what is 
here meant by a Nestorian, it looks like a trick- 
ish way of speaking, used by his friends to ridi- 
cule the proceedings against him as inconsistent ; 
perhaps to invert the crime of falsation; as if a 
Nestorian would rather change OC into O. For 
they that read history with judgement, will too 
often meet with such trickish reports ; and even 
in the very story of Macedonius I meet with some 


79 


other reports of the same kind. For Macedonius 
having in his keeping the original acts of the 
council of Chalcedon, signed by that emperor 
under whom it was called, and refusing to deliver 
up this book to the emperor Anastasius ; some, to 
make this emperor perjured, distorted the story ; 
as if, at his coming to the crown, he had promised 
under his hand and oath, that he would not act 
against the council of Chalcedon ; and represented 
his subscribed promise to be the book, which Ma- 
cedonius refused to deliver back to him. Mace- 
donius had got his bishopric by being against 
the council of Chalcedon, and had subscribed 
the henoticum’ of Zeno, in which that council 
was anathematized ; and this being objected 
against him, his friends, to stifle the accusation, 
make a contrary story of the emperor; as if, when 
he came to the crown, he had done as much as that 
in behalf of the council. Another report was’, 
*“‘ That the people of Alexandria and all Egypt, 
great and small, bond and free, priests and monks, 
excepting only strangers, became about this time 
possessed with evil spirits, and being deprived of 
human speech, barked day and night like dogs; 
so that they were afterwards bound with iron 
chains, and drawn to the church, that they might 
recover their health. For they all ate their hands 
and arms. And then an angel appeared to some 
of the people, saying, that this happened to them 

1 Vide Annotationes Valesii in Evagr. &c. lib. iii. cap. 31. 
- 3 Victor Turonensis in Chronico. 


80 


because they anathematized the council of Chal- 
cedon, and threatened that they should do so no 
more.” Again, we are told in history’, ‘‘ That 
the adversaries of Macedonius produced certain 
boys in judgement to accuse both him and them- 
selves of sodomy; but that when they found his 
genitals were cut off, they betook themselves to 
other arts for deposing him,” Now if you can 
believe that a eunuch had the beard and voice of 
another man; and that in a solemn council the 
great patriarch of the East was thus accused and 
thus acquitted, and yet deposed ; you must ac- 
knowledge that there were many bishops among 
the Greeks who would not stick at as ill and 
shameless things as corrupting the Scriptures. 
But if all this be a sham invented to discredit 
the council, the need of such shams adds credit to 
their proceedings in condemning him for a falsary. 

XVIII. This council, if I mistake not, sat first 
at Constantinople, being that council which The- 
odorus calls ‘‘a company of mercenary wretches ;” 
and Nicephorus, “a convention of heretics, as- 
‘sembled against Macedonius.”” Upon their add- 
ing to the “‘ thrice holy” these words’, ‘‘ who art 
crucified for us,” the people fell into a tumult ; 
and afterwards, when Macedonius came to be ac- 
cused, they fell into a greater tumult, crying out, 
“* The time of persecution is at hand; let no man 


1 Evagrius, lib. iii, cap. 32. 
2 Theodor. lib. ii.—Nicephor. lib. xvi. cap. 26.—Evagr. 
lib. iii, cap. 44. 


81 


desert the father ;” meaning Macedonius. In this 
tumult, which was said to be stirred up by the 
clergy of Constantinople, many parts of the city 
were burnt, and the nobles and emperor brought 
into the greatest danger ; insomuch that the em- 
peror was forced to proffer the resignation of his 
empire, before he could quiet the multitude. 
Then seeing that, if Macedonius were judged, the 
people would defend him, he caused him to be 
carried by force in the night to Chalcedon ; and 
thence into banishment, as Theodorus writes. 
Whence I gather, that the council removed also 
to Chalcedon to avoid the tumult, and finish their 
proceeding there. For the story of his being ac- 
cused in judgement by boys, Nicephorus places 
after this tumult; and all agree that he was con- 
demned ; and the monks of Palestine, in an epi- 
stle recorded by Evagrius, say that Xenaias and 
Dioscorus, joined with many bishops, banished him. 
When his condemnation was sent him, signed by 
the emperor, he asked, whether they that had 
condemned him received the council of Chalcedon ; 
and when they that brought him the sentence de- 
nied it, he replied, ‘‘ If Arians and Macedonians 
had sent me a book of condemnation, could I re- 
ceive it?” So that it seems he stood upon the 
illegality of the council. The next day one 
Timothy was made bishop of Constantinople, and 
he sent about the condemnation of Macedonius 
to all the absent bishops to be subscribed '. 


1 Theophanes, p. 135. 


82 


Whence'I think it will easily be granted, that he 
was condemned as a falsary by the greatest part 
of the Eastern empire ; and by consequence, that 
the genuine reading was till then, by the churches 
of that empire, accounted o. For had not the 
public reading then been o, there could have 
been no colour for pretending that he changed it 
into EC. 

XIX. About six years after Anastasius died, 
and his successors, Justin and Justinian, set up 
the authority of the council of Chalcedon again, 
together with that of the Pope over the Eastern 
churches, as universal bishop ; and from that time 
the friends of Macedonius prevailing, it is pro- 
bable, that in opposition to the heretics, which 
condemned him, and for promoting and establish- 
ing the doctrine of two natures in Christ, they 
received and spread abroad the reading OC. 
But as for the authority of the Pope, that fell 
again with Rome in the Gothic wars, and slept 
till Phocas revived it. 

XX. I told you of several shams put about by 
the friends of Macedonius, to discredit the pro- 
ceedings of the council against him. There is 
one which notably confirms what has hitherto 
been said, and makes it plain that his friends re- 
ceived his corruptions as genuine Scripture. For 
whereas Macedonius was banished for corrupting 
the New Testament, his friends retorted the crime 
upon the council, as if they had taken upon them, 
under colour of purging the Scriptures from the 


83 


corruptions of Macedonius, to correct in them 
whatever they thought the Apostles, as unskilful 
men and idiots, had written amiss. For this I 
gather from an ironical report of this kind put 
about in the West, and thus recorded by Victor 
Turonensis: ‘‘ Messald V. C. consulibus, Constan- 
tinopoli, jubente Anastasio Imperatore, sancta 
evangelia, tanquam ab idiotis compostta, repre- 
henduntur et emendantur ;’’ that is, ‘‘ In the con- 
sulship of Messala, the holy gospels, by the 
command of the emperor Anastasius, were cen- 
sured and corrected at Constantinople, as if 
written by evangelists that were idiots.” Here 
Victor errs in the year. For Messala was consul 
anno Christi 506, that is, six years before the 
banishment of Macedonius. But Victor is very 
uncertain in dates of the years; for he places the 
banishment of Macedonius in the consulship of 
Avienus 502; and the above-mentioned tumult 
ubout the Trisagium in the consulship of Probus, 
anno Christi 513; whereas all these things hap- 
pened in the same year. For it is plain by this 
chronicle, that the Scriptures were examined and 
corrected about this time by a council at Constan- 
tinople, by the order of Anastasius ; and I meet 
with no other council to which this character can 
agree, besides that which deposed Macedonius. 
Now that they should censure and correct the go- 
spels, as if written by idiots, is too plainly ironical 
to be true history ; and therefore it must be an 
abusive report, invented and put about to ridicule 


84 


and shame the council, and to propagate the cor- 
ruptions of Macedonius as the genuine apostolic 
reading of the Scriptures, which the council had 
rashly corrected. 

XXI. So then the falsation was set on foot in 
the beginning of the fifth century, and is now of 
about twelve hundred years standing ; and there- 
fore since it lay but in a letter, and so was more 
easily spread abroad in the Greek manuscripts than 
the testimony of ‘‘ the Three in Heaven” in the 
Latin ones, we need not wonder if the old read- 
ing be scarce to be met with in any Greek ma- 
nuscripts now extant ; and yet it is in some. 

XXII. For though Beza tells us that all the 
Greek manuscripts read Qeoc, yet I must tell 
Beza’s readers, that all his manuscripts read o. 
For he had no other manuscripts of the epistles 
besides the Claromontan ; and in this manuscript, 
as Morinus by ocular inspection has-since informed 
us, the ancient reading was o': but yet in another 
hand, and with other ink, the letter © has been 
written out of the line ; and the letter O, thickened 
to make a C, appears; which instance shows 
sufficiently by whom the ancient reading has been 


1 Alié manu et atramento, extra linez seriem, addita est 1i- 
tera ©, et ambesa paululum ©, ut appareret sigma. Sed 
preepostera emendatio facile conspicitur. Hae Morinus in 
Exercitationibus Biblicis, lib. i. Exercitat. ii. cap. 4.—At Beza 
nobis aliqua invidit, ut ex ejus epistola ad Academiam Canta- 
brigiensem a Waltono edita, liquet; ubi variantes aliquas 
lectiones celandas esse admonet. 


85 


changed. Valesius also read o in one of the Spa- 
nish manuscripts ; and so did the author of the 
Oxford edition of the New Testament, ann. Ch. 
1675,in the manuscript of Lincoln College library, 
which is the oldest of the Oxford manuscripts. 
The Alexandrian manuscript ' and one of Colbert’s, 
and Cyril, c. 12. Scholiorum (teste Photio MS. 
com. in Epist.), read OC. So then there are 
some ancient Greek manuscripts which read 0, 
and others o¢; but I do not hear of any Latin 
ones, either ancient or modern, which read Qeoe. 

XXIII. And besides to read OQeog makes the 
sense obscure and difficult. For how can it pro- 
perly be said, ‘‘ that God was justified in the spi- 


e Alio atramento jam ducta cernitur tam Jineola per medium 
literee ©, quam virgulasuperna; ut jam legatur @C. Putat 
autem Millius, lineolas illas olim tenues fuisse et prope evani- 
das, et novo dein atramento incrassatas fuisse ; eo quod per- 
lustrato attentius loco, lineole per medium © ducte, que 
primam aciem fugerat, ductus quosdam ac vestigia satis certa 
deprehendere visus esset; przsertim ad partem sinistram, que 
peripheriam litere pertingit; luculentiora multo habiturus 
nisi obstante lituré quam dixit hodierna lineole ipsi superin- 
ductaé. Verum si lineola antiquitus tam conspicua esset, ut 
usque nunc per medium linez crassioris, alio atramento super- 
inductee, cerni possit ; quid opus esset, ut a linea illa superin~ 
ducté incrassaretur? Sin olim tam evanida esset, ut cerni vix 
posset; mirum est, quod ejus ductus et vestigia satis certa, 
per medium literz illius superinducte, etiamnum appareant. 
Doceant verba evanida aliis in locis atramento novo incrassata 
fuisse, vel fateantur OC hic mutatum in OC. 


86 


rit?”* But to read o, and interpret it of Christ, 
as the ancient Christians did, without restraining 
it to his divinity, makes the sense very easy. For 
the promised and long-expected Messias, the hope 
of Israel, is to us ‘‘ the great mystery of godliness.” 
And this mystery was at length manifested to the 
Jews from the time of his baptism, and justified 
to be the person whom they expected. 

XXIV. I have now given you an account of 
the corruption of the text, the sum of which is 
this; the difference between the Greek and the 
ancient versions puts it past dispute, that either 
the Greeks have corrupted their manuscripts, or 
the Latins, Syrians, and. Ethiopians their ver- 
sions ; and it is more reasonable to lay the fault 
upon the Greeks than upon the other three, for 
these considerations. It was easier for one nation 
to do it than for three to conspire. It was easier 
to change a letter or two in the Greek, than six 
words in the Latin. In the Greek, the sense is ob- 
scure ; in the versions, clear. It was agreeable 
to the interest of the Greeks to make the change, 

* How is it said in St. Luke, that ‘‘ publicans justified God’’ 
by receiving John’s baptism? If to read Qco¢ gives a difficult 
sense in this clause, to read 6, will it give an easy sense in others? 
‘Are the propositions, that a mystery was mantfested in the flesh, 
a mystery was received up into glory, both which arise from the 
reading 0, very easily intelligible? Is it easy to understand what 
mystery was manifested in the flesh, if our Lord’s divinity is set 
out of the question? If it be allowed that his divinity makes 
the mystery, the two readings will be equivalent tn sense, but 
O©ccs makes the best construction.—Bp. Horsley. 


87 


but against the interest of other nations to do it; 
and men are never false to their interest. The 
Greek reading was unknown in the times of the 
Arian controversy ; but that of the versions then 
in use amongst both Greeks and Latins. Some 
Greek manuscripts render the Greek reading 
dubious; but those of the versions hitherto col- 
lated agree. There are no signs of corruption in 
the versions hitherto discovered; hut in the 
Greek we have showed you particularly when, ou 
what occasion, and by whom, the text was cor- 
rupted. | 
XXV. I know not whether it be worth the 
while to tell you, that in the printed works of 
Athanasius, there is an epistle De incarnatione 
verbi, which reads Qeoc. For this epistle relates 
to the Nestorian heresy, and so was written by a 
much later author than Athanasius, and may also 
possibly have been since corrected, like the works 
of Chrysostom and Cyril, by the corrected texts 
of St. Paul’s Epistles. I have had so short a 
time to run my eye over authors, that I cannot 
tell whether, upon further search, more passages 
about this falsation may not hereafter occur per- 
tinent to the argument. But if there should, I 
presume it will not be difficult, now the falsation 
is thus far laid open, to know what construction 
to put upon them, and how to apply them. 
XXVI. You see what freedom I have used in 
this discourse, and I hope you will interpret it 
candidly. For if the ancient churches, in debating 


rit ??’?* 
as the 
it to h: 
the pre 
of Isra: 
And tl 
Jews | 
to be | 
xX! 
the co: 
this; | 
ancien’ 
the Gre 
the La 
sions ; 
upon t) 
these c 


to do it 
to chav 
words | 
to the © 


Bats. 
= 


88 


and deciding the greatest mysteries of religion, 
knew nothing of these two texts, I understand 
not, why we should be so fond of them now the 
debates are over. And whilst it is the character 
of an honest man to be pleased, and of a man of 
interest to be troubled at the detection of frauds, 
and of both to run most into those passions when 
the detection is made plainest ; I hope this letter 
will, to one of your integrity, prove so much the 
more acceptable, as it makes a further discovery 
than you have hitherto met with in commen- 
tators. 


THE END. 


Printed by R. and J. E. Taylor, Red Lion Court, Fleet Street. 


+ 


Pe 


